# Society
2020-04-26 19:29 :50

```toc
```
---

- [x] #todo 


## Composition of Rural Society
2020-04-27 12:21:28

---

### Peasants
-   Individual peasants cultivated their land
    -   **Khots** were large landholdings
    -   **Balahars** were small plots
    -   Owned oxen and plough
-   Landless menial classes were below peasantry
-   Wells were abundant, so was land.
-   Sold their crops for payment of revenue in cash
- $  Barani mentions highest strata of peasants as Khots and Muqaddams who levied Qismat is Khoti from villagers during AK's reign, were generally prosperous.

#### Dwelling of Peasants
-   Mud huts, bamboo supports, thatched roof.
-   Floor plastered with cowdung.
-   Little furniture, slept on the floor or cotton quilts.
-   Earthen pots, no separate bathing place, no privacy.
-   Prosperous peasants had land around main structure, courtyard and chabutara.
-   Food was rice, lintel, onion, chillies, ghee was a luxury.
-   Hindu peasants went bareheaded and barefooted, Gujarat and Rajasthani's wore red handkerchief around head.
-   Women wore sari or lehanga.

## Ruling Classes
2020-04-27 12:21:37

---

-   Head was Sultan, synonymous with the state.
    -   Was politically independent but culturally part of Islamic world
    -   Luxurious living to maintain distance from common.
-   Owned and made huge palaces. Ibn Battuta mentions lofty gates, thousand pillars, huge halls, polished by wooden pillars during MBT.
-   Royal umbrella sceptre used, Hindu rulers used the Chhatra, Danda with a Chowri (fly whisk).
-   Band of Musicians accompanied the Sultan.
-   **Darbar** was where court proceeding, special occasions like coronation, royal function etc took place.
-   **Harem** was where women lived. Sultan's mother, his queens, female servants and slaves lived. A karkhana was attached to their needs.


## Town Dwellers
2020-04-27 12:21:44

---

### City Life
-   Broach, Cambay, Lakhnauti, Sonarogaon and Multan were some trading centres.
- $  Ibn Battuta has given detailed account of  Delhi.
-   Largest city in Islamic world, mixed population of merchants.
-   Multanis were mostly Hindus traded West Asia others were Gujarati, Marwaris.
-   Jains constructed temples.
-   Large residential buildings surrounded by Orchards and fruit gardens  Cambay.
-   Big house, consumed good food and fine clothes.
- &  Cotton silk garments, sandalwood paste, rings, gold earrings studded with precious stones used by men.
- &  Women wore sari and silk blouses, jewellery made of gold and silver metals, earrings, anklets, rings on fingers and toes
-   Muslim merchants clothes studded w/ gold, long boots
-   Bengal, Gujarat famous for fine clothes, Cambay for gold and silver works.
-   Barani mentions Multanis and Sahas of Delhi acquired wealth from maliks and amirs and repaid their loans with assignment of draft over iqta.
-   Broker/ Dallals operated b/w merchants and customers.
-   Sarraf or money changers.

## Women
2020-04-27 12:21:51

---
-   Women were subordinate to men, main duty was to rear children.
-   Birth of daughter was looked down upon, were confined to antahpura /inner sanctum.
-   Early marriages, wife's duty towards husband his kula was stressed.
-   Annulment of marriages took place in special circumstances like desertion, disease or mental disorder.
- @  Some upper class women were given education like Dewalrani, Rupamati, Padmavati and Razia Sultan.
- $ Ibn Battuta mentions a woman burning herself/sati but it was limited to upper strata of society. Practice of Jauhar among Rajput.
-   Widow had the right to property of a sonless husband but did not apply uniformly all over.
-   Purdah was prevalent among both Hindus and Muslims and attained institutionalised form


## Religious Classes
2020-04-27 12:21:54

---

-   Ulema were given special religious place in administration.
-   Dastarbandan were associated with admin of justice and religious laws.
-   Helped in theological matters.
-   Formed the elite group Ahl Qalam.
-   Gave moral support to imperial rule.


## Caste and Slavery under the Sultanate
2020-04-27 12:22:03

---

Slaves and Servants
-   Master-slave relation formed, noblemen referred themselves as slaves
-   2 types of slaves were there
    -   Bought in an open market
    -   Prisoners of war
-   Bought for domestic service or for special skills
-   FST collected 180,000 slaves most employed in handicrafts or bodyguards
- !   **Eunuchs** were slaves to guard harems
-   Women slaves were for either domestic service or entertainment and pleasure.
-   Became mark of prosperity, nobles vied among each other.
-   were treated better than servants.


## Position of Hindus and Jizya
- Religious freedom to those who accepted M rule were called '**Zimmis**'. 
- New temples could not be built but old ones could be repaired. 
- Origin of Jizya has been debated even traced to pre Islamic Iran and Greece.
- @ Until the time of Khalji and Firuz there is no reference to Jizya as a cess. As a separate tax it was collected in small section in towns.
-  Qazi Mughis in court of AK was in favour of collecting it and using it as means of harassing and humiliating, insulting Hindus. 
- $  Barani says that during the reign of Iltutmish argument was put to give Hindus either Islam or Death. Nizam ul Mulk Junaidi said M were too few like salt in food and would be impractical.
-  H continued to dominate country side as Khuts, Muqaddams, Chaudhuri, rana, Thakur.
- Barani objects to H being honored, distinguished, favored and eminent.

## PYQs

**Society**

1. Analyse the social composition and the role of mobility under the successors of Iltutmish. How did it affect the contemporary politics? [2012, 30m]