---
uid: 73713f94352dd8c279ce37bea8354bb0
---

# Human Values
2020-06-09 19:15:41
```toc
```
---


```ad-note

Definition of value : Values are principles or standards of behaviour. It is ones judgement of what is important in life.

Or A person's or society's beliefs about what constitutes a good behaviour and what things are important in life.

```

## What are Human Values?
-   At core to Humans, taken into account when interacting w/ other humans.
-   HV reflects Sense of right and wrong in a person, what should be the appropriate course of action. Trust and Affection are foundation and complete values in a society. [^1] 
-   Expected by all human beings. It is what makes us Human.
-   5 core HV are - **Love**, **Peace**, **Truth, Right Conduct** and **Non-violence (LPTRN)**
-   Others are - respect, acceptance, consideration, appreciation, listening, openness, affection, empathy
-   Various other types of V are Individual, Social, Environment, Organizational, Constitutional.
 
Example from Famous personalities : 
- Buddha and Jain Tirthankaras preaching core human values as a coherent force to unite different societies/communities during ancient India.
- Bhakti saints as being forebearears of Human values despite prevalence of Medievalism, Barbarism and Incessant warfare during the time. Served as beacon of light for many. 
- The example of Gandhiji and his satyagrah as being an influence of LPTRN to other leaders like MLK Jr, Nelson Mandela. 
- Shown by allied forces after the surrender of German and Japan who despite committing inhuman atrocities at Auswitz, Warsaw, Nanking were treated with right conduct, respect, consideration.
- Life of Florence Nightingale serving the wounded soldiers after seeing the suffering during the Crimean war of 1850s.


### John Rawls theory of Social Justice [^2]
- Rawls was an American moral and political philosopher who is known for his work 'A Theory of Justice'.
- Social justice is  fairness, equity in terms of distribution of wealth, opportunities and privileges within a liberal society.
- His theory of justice as fairness recommends equal basic liberties, equality of opportunity, maximum benefit to least advantaged section where inequalities exists.
- He carried forward the idea of [[Major Ideas of Enlightenment#Wrote Social Contract 1762 | Social Contract]] forward. A/C to him society is responsible for distribution of primary goods necessary for the individual to realise their rational life plans. [^3]
- A/C his there are 2 principles of Justice 
	1. Equal Liberty : Ex Fundamental Rights, Political Liberties, Liberty of Conscience, Freedom of Speechm Right to property etc. They are subject to 2nd Principle of Justice. 
	2. **Social Inequality** : “the inequalities of income and welfare are considered to be fair if and only if these inequalities are for the benefit of the worst off” aka Difference Principle. It requires that institutions of adm be accessible to every individual.


---

[^1]: lkouniv 
[^2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Rawls
[^3]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4915381/