---
uid: 6dda07659d821e72554403655c35fe1f
---

# Role of family, society, educational institution in inculcating values
2020-10-21 16:43:08
```toc
```
---

##   Role of Family 
-   Nuclear : gives individualism, modernism or 
-   Joint : patriarchal values, sharing, conservatism
-   The idea of parents being the first teachers of children. Shaping their perspective towards the world. Influencing their interaction with other beings including animals.
-   As a support system during times of crisis ex rehabilitation from trauma, addiction, failure.  
-   Styles of parenting such as Autoritative, Democratic and Permissive.
-   Example : 

##   Role of Society 
  - like neighbours, peers, colleagues, movies, televisions etc tolerance, conformity, social control.
-   Ex. Maasai tribal society donating 14 cows after September 11 terror attacks to America despite they themselves being from an underdeveloped countries.
-    European soceities being accomodative towards Jews when after the fled Nazi oppression. 

##   Role of Educational Institutions and Teachers 
  - most imp is teachers, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, secularism, non-violence.
  - shapes cognitive ability of students, educates and prepares them for their future
  - Irrespective of age, learning is a lifelong process ex. Gokhale as Political teacher of Gandhiji.
  - Ex. Anne Sullivan as being a lifelong companion and teacher of Hellen Keller.
  - Buddhist Universities as religious, spiritiual and cultural teachers in ancient India.
  - Role of Rahul Dravid in shaping U19 cricket team. Robert Ladouceur coaching the De La salle College American football team.

##   Role of Religion 
  - compassion, love.
  - teaches Morality ex Jatakas stories are part of Religious books of Buddhist but have very important life lesson for all. Similarly, stories of Panchtantra.
  -  




