# The RTCs

2020-04-27 15:20:32

```toc
```

---

## Irwin’s Declaration (October 31, 1929)

- Aka Diwali declaration.
- as Labour Government came to power it said that the ==intention of British gov was the attainment of Dominion Status for India==.
- He also proposed a RTC after Simon Commission report was published.

## 1st RTC Was Held b/w Nov 1930 and Jan 1931

- was opened by King George V and chaired by Ramsay Macdonald.
- Congress did not participate.
- Outcome : It was generally agreed that India was to develop into a federation but little was done for its implementation due to ongoing CDM protests.

## Gandhi-Irwin Pact Aka Delhi Pact Feb 1931

Irwin agreed on

- Immediate release of political prisoner not convicted of violence.
- remission of not collected fines.
- return all land not yet sold.
- Lenient treatment of resignants.
- Right to make salt in coastal villages for personal consumption.
- Withdrawal of emergency ordinances.
- He turned down commuation of Bhagat Singh and others death sentences and public inquiry into police excess.
- Gandhi agreed to suspend CDM and participate in next RTC.

```ad-Views

-   RJ Moore : bourgeois factor significant behind compromise
-   Sumit Sarkar : IN bourgeois played crucial role
-   Judith B, Markovits, Basudev Chatterji has similar views
-   But business group did not speak w/ one voice
-   ADD Gordon : enthusiasm of industrialist dampened by depression, boycott, hartals, social disruption
-   Marketers and traders staunch supporter of MG
-   INC umbrella org so cannot take

```

## 2nd RTC b/w Sep 1931 to Dec 1931

- After the Gandhi-Irwin pact.
- Indian liberal like Tej Bahadur Sapru, C.Y. Chintamani and Srinivasa Sastri appealed to Gandhi towards it.
- Gandhi along with A Rangaswani Iyengar and M M Malviya were present.
- Lord Irwin was replaced by Willingdon.
- Winston Churchill objected negotiations with Congress.

### Outcomes

- ==Creation of 2 muslim majority provinces NWFP and Sindh==.
- Setting up of Indian Consultative Committee.
- Expert committee in Finance, Franchise and States.
- Prospect of unilateral British Communal Award if Indians fail to agree.

## 3rd RTC

- Nov 1932.
- Congress refused to attend was not invited.
- Labor party also refused to attend.
- White Paper was issued became basis of 1935 act.
- Chaudhary Rahmat Ali proposed name of Pakistan.
- Other members of the RTC were mostly loyalists, communalists, careerists, and place-hunters, big landlords and representatives of the princes.
- 2nd RTC the gov dismissed the demand for freedom.
