# Nationalism and Peasant Movements/ Peasant Movement in the 1930s and 1940s

2020-04-27 15:20:43

```toc
```

---

- The **great depression** of 1929-30 and the **new phase of nationalist movements** *shaped* peasant movements in the 30s and 40s.
- Incomes decreased due to depression but the prices of commodities remained the same.
- CDM in many places took the shape of no tax and no rent movt
- CDM also led to the emergence of a new young, militant cadre of leaders which was mostly leftist. Their actions were consolidated by the formation of CSP.
- **All India Kisan Congress** was formed in 1936 by NG Ranga.
- **Kisan manifesto** was brought out by Indulal Yagnik.
- Kisan Sabhas were used as means to mobilise peasants.
- In Malabar CSP set up the Karshaka Sanghams for the abolition of feudal levies, renewal fees and advance rents. The marching of Jathas became a common occurrence to the house of large landlords.
- They also organised a campaign against the Malabar Tenancy Act in 1938.
- In coastal Andhra the areas of Bobbili, Mungala, Kalipatnam anti zamindari struggle was undertaken over cultivation of fishing rights. Summer school of economics was also organised so were lectures in History.
- In Bihar Provincial Kisan Sabha undertook meetings, demonstrations. Imp leaders were Sahjanand Saraswati, Rahul Sankrityayan etc. The major issues undertaken were Bakashat land, tenure of tenants, land rents etc.
- In Punjab Kirti Kisan and Naujawan Bharat Sabha organised similar agitations. Issues undertaken were the resettlement of revenues in Lahore and Amritsar districts. Baba Sohan Singh, Teja Singh, Baba Rur Singh etc were imp leaders.
- In Burdwan under Bankim Mukherji peasants agitated against the inc of canal tax. No rent campaign was org in Surma Valley of Assam.
- In Orissa Utkal provincial Kisan Sabha org such movements under Matali Chowdhary. Tribal participation was also seen.
- Tebhaga Movement in 1946 was launched by **Bengal Provincial Kisan Sabha**.
- Peasants wanted to pay only 1/3rd of the share as of the 1/2 paid earlier to the jotedars.
- They wanted the storage of the produce in their own godowns. This was recom. by the Bengal Land Revenue Commission aka the Floud Commission.
- Main centers were Dinajpur, Rangpur, Jalpaiguri, Mymensingh, Midnapore

## PYQs

---

**Nationalism and the Peasant Movements; Nationalism and Working** **class movements**

1. "The nationalist political movements for liberation such as the non-cooperation and civil disobedience movements and their leadership depended heavily on the peasantry." Comment. [1993, 20m]
