# Cripps Mission 1942 

2020-04-27 15:21:45

```toc
```

---

## Tripuri Crisis

- Subhash Bose decided to stand for the Presidency in 1939 putting as a spokesperson of militant politics and radical groups.
- His views were countered by Patel, Prasad and Kriplani who with the blessings of Gandhiji put Pattabhi Sitaramayya as the rival.
- Bose emerged victorious.

### The Reason for the Crisis Was

- Bose's criticism of the Congress leadership as being rightists, working with the gov on a compromise of a federation, not wanting a leftist as president and having already drawn a list of prospective central ministers.
- <u>Bose thought that India was ready for a mass movement Gandhi did not.</u>
- Bose wanted Gandhiji to lead the struggle and follow strategy and tactics laid by him
- ==Issue of federation rift in INC Haripura and Tripuri==.
- Bose - anti federation stand.

  > **BR Tomlinson** - fought out in ideological terms right vs left, proFed vs anti Fed, pro Ministry vs anti
  
- Bose formed a new party called the **Forward Bloc** within the Congress.
- later Bose resigned later he was also removed from all Cong position, banned to hold any exec office for 3 yrs.
- Cong began to lose popularity after 1938 coz popular frustration, militant mood.
- WWII broke out Gandhiji was sympathetic to the cause of Britain, Bose and other socialist did not want to support either party.
- Nehru did not wanted to take any advantage of Britain's difficulty nor did he wanted to support its war efforts. Gandhiji supported Nehru.
- Linlithgow pitched the Princess and the Muslim League against the Congress. Britain had no intention of leaving India.
- Congress ministries resigned. They wanted to start an immediate struggle. But Gandhiji did not.

### Reasons for not Launching a Struggle Immediately after WWII

- Cause of the Allies was just.
- <u>Lack of Hindu Muslim unity</u>.
- Conducive atmosphere was missing.
- Indiscipline and lack of cohesion within the congress.

- ==Gandhiji started the **Delhi Chalo movement** for the **freedom of speech** to preach against the participation in the war **individual Satyagrah**.==
- The CWC in 1941 overrode Gandhijji and Nehru's objection and offered full support towards defence of India.
- President Roosevelt, Chiang Kai Shek of China, Labour party of Britain appealed for the cooperation of the Indians to the British.

## Cripps Mission 1942

- was sent in Mar 1942 because of Reverses suffered by Britain in SE Asia and Japanese threat to invade India.
- Pressure from USA, China and USSR to seek Indian cooperation.
- Indian nationalists agreed to cooperate if substantial power was transferred.

### Main Proposals Were

- ==Indian Union with a dominion status would be set up to decide its relations with the Commonwealth==.
- **Constituent Assembly** would be convened to frame a new constitution.
- To accept the new consitution 2 condition needed to be fulfilled any province not willing to join could form a separate constitution and union and *rights of racial and religous minorities were safeguarded* -> ==this was the acceptance to the demand of Pakistan==. #important 
- Defence of India would remain in British hands and Gov Gen powers would remain intact.

### Objections/Problems

- Dominion status rather than full independence.
- Representation to the princely states not by the people but by nomination.
- Provision for partition of India.
- No acceptance to the demand of immediate transfer of power
- Cripps was asked not to go beyond the Draft declaration, it gave him no power to bargain and negotiate.

## PYQs

---

**The Cripps Mission**

1. "The Cripps Mission gave India‚ a post-dated cheque." Comment. [1982, 20m]
