# Wavell Plan

2020-04-27 15:21:57

```toc
```

---

## C Rajgopalachari Formula May 1944

- ==Solve deadlock b/w ML and INC==. Jinnah wanted the Congress to accept the 2 nation theory. A constitutional solution was sought.
- He prepared a formula for Congress-League cooperation. It was a tacit acceptance of League's demand for Pakistan.
- Gandhiji supported this formula.
- ==Core principle was the plebiscite of all the people in Muslim majority regions==.
- ML should <u>endorse the demand for complete independence</u> and in formation of provisional interim gov at the centre.
- ==Demarcate districts with Muslim majority in North West and North East India== -> plebiscite to be conducted on all inhabitants basis of adult suffrage **on whether they wanted to form a separate sovereign state**. #important 
- Agreement would be made for defence, Communication and transport etc.
- terms would be binding only in case of transfer of power.
- If partition was accepted agreement to be made jointly for safeguarding defence, commerce and communications.

## Desai Liaquat Pact January 1945

- secret talk for future coalition govt.
- Liaquat gave up the demand for separate Muslim state in turn for parity of Muslims to Hindus in council of ministers.
- League was accepted as representatives of Muslims.

## Wavell Plan June 1945

- Gandhiji was released on May 6 1944 and political activity was revived.
- Viceroy was certain of an impending struggle to pre-empt this he started formulating the Wavell offer or the Simla agreement.
- Congress leaders were released to participate in the <u>Simla conference in 1945 which marked the end of the struggle since 1942</u>.
- Conservative gov led by Churchill was also keen to reach a solution on the constitutional question in India.
	- was proposed in Shimla on June 1945 - is called the Simla Conference.

### Main Provisions

- ==Except Gov Gen and Commander in Chief all mem of executive council to be Indian.==
	- This council was to function as an interim gov under 1935 Act.
- Caste Hindus and Muslims to have equal representation.
- Gov Gen was to exercise veto on advise of ministers.
- Representative of different parties to submit joint list to the viceroy for nomination to exec council.
- New constitution once war was finally won.

### Aftermath

- The League claimed some kind of a veto in the council. Congress objected as it would reduce it to the stauts of a purely caste Hindu party.
- Wavell announced breakdown of talks this gave League a virtual veto, strengthened its position.
