# National Politics from NCN to CDM

2020-04-27 15:19:23

```toc
```

---

- Gandhiji was arrested in 1922 for spreading disaffection and jailed for 6 years.
- CR Das and Motilal Nehru advocated to enter legislative councils to 'end them or mend them' was defeated by the Congress
- They quit and formed the Congress-Khilafat party/ Swaraj Party. were called the pro-changers and those advocating boycott of the legislative council were called the no-changers
- Both these parties agreed that the masses were exhausted and required breathing time
- fill the political void that had generated, make the council an arena for political struggle and avoid its usage by other loyalists or by the gov to weaken the congress
- No Changers believed that it would bring political corruption and the loss of revolutionary zeal
- Surat like split was avoided a need for unity was realised and Swarajists realised the imp of mass agitation to usher national demands
- Gandhiji was released from prison and an agreement was signed where Swarajists were to work as integral part of Congress - in Belgaum session 1924
- Swarajists won majority in the CLA had 3 main issues :
    - Constitutional advance towards self-governance
    - Civil liberties, release of political prisoners and repeal of repressive laws.
    - Dev of indigenous industries.
- Congress in the meantime captured many municipalities and local bodies to promote constructive programs.
- Limitations :
    - Limit to obstruction was reached
    - Lack of coordination with outer mass political work.
    - Coalition politics began to pull back Swarajists from obstructionism.
    - Internal dissention was sown by the gov and it bore fruit
    - A group of responsivists emerged, communalism also led to factionalism.
- No changers carried work to promote Khadi and spinning, national education and Hindu Muslim unity, work against untouchability and boycotting of foreign cloth.
- Promotion of Charkha mark of self-help, building ashram in Sabarmati
- Communal riots in NWFP, Calcutta
- Crisis of export oriented colonial economy - great depression
- Drop in prices of wheat, cotton, rice, jute market crashed
- Peasant movt outside cong
- Muslim untouchables Namasudra, Santhals
    - Tanika Sarkar - parallel stream of protest
    - Cong busy reconciling interest of richer landowning peasants
- Emergence of capitalist class org under FICCI 1927
- Conflict of bourgeois w/ imperialist GD Birla, Purushottamdas Thakurdas, Lalji Naranji
- 1928 -29 peak period of labour unrest coz penetration of Communism
- Bardoli Satyagrah - Kunvarji + Kalyanji Mehta, launched by Vallabhai Patel, Kaliparaj tribals community, enhanced rev rates cut down


## All India States Peoples Conference AISPC 1927

- All India States Peoples Conference AISPC wasa conglomeration of political movements in the princely states of British Raj was also called Praja Mandals or Lok Parishads.
- First session was held in 1927 in Bombay.
- In 1920 Congress had allowed people to join from Princely states but on condition that they could not take part in any political activity in the states as Congressmen or in their name but as individuals or mem of local political associations.
