# Iron Ore

2020-04-29 01:04:00

```toc
```

---
- India is the **4**th highest Iron ore Producer in the world and has the **5**th largest reserves.

## Types of Iron Ores

### Magnetite(Fe3O4)

- Has very high Iron content upto **72**% and is best quality of ore colour is **black**.
- Ore needs to be **beneficiated** before feasible amounts of it can be recovered.
- Magnetite with less iron content 25%-35% is called **Taconite**.
- Naturally magnetised content is called **lodestone**.
- In India it is found in **Dharwad and Cuddapah** systems.
- Karnataka 73%, Andhra Pradesh 14%, Rajasthan 5% TN 4.9%

### Haematite (Fe2O3)

- It is red in colour and has content upto ==60-70%==, sought after industrial ore.
- It is most abundantly available in India.
- Odisha 33% , Jharkhand 26%, Chhattisgarh 18%

### Limonite

- **Yellowish** in colour with 40 to 60 per cent iron content
- mines are open cast ; hence mining is easy and cheap
- Found in **Damuda** series in Raniganj coal field, Garhwal in Uttarakhand, Mirzapur in Uttar Pradesh and Kangra valley of Himachal Pradesh.

### Siderite (FeCO3)

- less than 40 per cent iron content.
- Mining this is economically unviable.
- does NOT contain ==sulphur or phosphorus==.
- it is self-fluxing due to the presence of **lime**.

## Location

- Odisha : BarabilKoira valley
- Chhattisgarh: **Bailadila mine** largest mechanised mine in Asia, transports to Vizag - Japan, DalliRajhara range.
- Jharkhand : First mine started in **Singhbhum**, Magnetite in Daltenganj, Palamu district, Noamandi mine in Singhbhum richest.
- Karnataka : Kemmangundi in Bababudan hills of Chikmagalur district, Sandur and Hospet in Bellary.
