# Mahayana

2020-04-27 11:52:58

```toc
```

---

It is recorded that in the **fourth** council in King **Kanishka**'s reign, there was a split in Buddhism to Hinayana and Mahayana Buddhism.

The various school under Buddhism are :

## Hinayana Buddhism

- It means the lesser vehicle. Both the Hinayana and Mahayana terms were coined by the Mahayanists.
- It is more of an **orthodox** school did not believe in **idol** or **image** worship of Buddha
- try to attain individual salvation through self discipline and meditation.
- One of the sub-sects of Hinayana is ==Sthaviravada or Theravada==
- Hinayana scholars used Pali language
- Ashoka patronised the sect

## Mahayana Buddhism

- It means the greater vehicle.
- believes in the heavenliness of Buddha and Bodhisattvas embodying Buddha Nature.
- followers believe in idol or image worship of Buddha.
- concept of Bodhisattva is the result of Mahayana Buddhism.
- Prominent Mahayana texts include Lotus Sutra, Mahavamsa.
- sub-sects of Mahayana developed in the later periods as **Vajrayana**.
- scholars predominantly used Sanskrit as a language.
- Kanishka of Kushana dynasty is said to be the founder of Mahayana sect.

### Origins

- Could be traced to the **Mahasanghika school**.

> In Buddhist tradition as per Heinz Bechert sangha-bheda or schism has a different meaning than that of Chritianity. It dealth with monastic discipline and not doctrinal issues.

- Further it is evident that the emergence of Mahayana did not inf fact immediately lead to a split in the sangha.
- It seems to have originated among a group of monks within the sangha. Faxian and Xuanxang mentions that in 4th and 5th cent both these monks used to live in the same sanctuary.
- This was because Vinaya rules did not prevent monks from following different practices and have diff views in matters of doctrine.

## Characterstics and Spread

- Increasing use of Sanskrit in Mahayana texts.
- Idea of Bodhisattva/ wisdom being assumed greater importance under it. Mahayana considered the goal of attainment of nibbana and becoming an arhat a lesser goal. Becoming a bodhisattva was a higher one.
- The stages along the bodhisattva path involved the attainment of various perfections known as paramita. #PrelimsPYQ
	- They consisted of generosity/dana, good conduct/shila, patience forbearance/kshanti, mental strength/ virya, meditation/ dhyana, wisdom / prajna , skilfulnees in means/ upaya kaushalya, determination/ pranidhana, power / bala and knowledge / jnana.
- 2 major texts that represented it were in Madhyamaka and Yogachara.
	- Madhyamaka was founded by Nagarjuna in 2nd cent and
