# Dalit Movements

2020-04-27 15:28:20

```toc
```

---

## Factors that Led to Dalit Consciousness

- Constant hared and discrimination from various centuries that has been generated. D labourers have been exploited, their lives have been degenerated and have been excluded from mainstream society.
- These movt had roots in the Vedic period ex various Shramana sects. Gave a socio-religious sanction to the movt.
- Introduction of English and Western Education which brought them towards ideas of equality, justice, liberty.
- D were favoured during British policy of divide and rule. BR policy of classifying caste helped mass mobilisation among them.
- Better communication network provided for linking of D from different geographical locations.
- New opportunities since 19th century gave them an opportunity for upwards economic mobility.
- Social reform movt of Jyotiba Phule and Sri Narayan Guru.
- Bhimrao Ambedkars actions and his movts for Dalit upliftment.

## Dalit Panthers

- Started in early 1970s in Maharashtra. Party formed in 1972.
- Precursor
	- Youth movt were picking up ex formation of Yuva Kranti Dal in 1967.
	- D youth questioned the post Ambedkar leadership of Republican party of India.
	- D literature blossmed such as magazines.
- Inspired by the Black panther Party which supported it and wrote about it in the US Black Panther Newspaper.
- Founded by JV Pawar and Namdeo Dhasal calling the movt as radical departure from earlied D movts.
- Reasons for their emergence
	- Many offshoots of Ambedkarite movts emerged having different ideas.
	- Constitutional provision were only but theoretical in nature
	- Political consiousness among D groups sent them towards Parliamentarianism.
	- Militant insurgency movt was gaining popularity ex Che Guevara, Fidel Castro in Cuba.
- Focused on Economic and Social Justice. Its mem were Working class people
- Most mem were SC or Buddhists. Leaders were literary figures.
- Published their journal Sadhana. They called for boycotting 25th indepedence day as Kala Swatantra Din/ Black Independence Day.
- Tried to link their struggle w/ other opressed people of their world.
- Leftist in their ideology but not Marxist who wanted Amedkarite methods for socio-politcal change
- Criticism
	- lacked proper channeling of anger to achieve their goal
	- Reflected TV mentality, neglected economic foundation.
	- Showed lack of clarity.
	- Militancy remained confined to their speaches and writings did not manifest into actions.
	- Clash among the ideas of Ambedkar who forbade violent actions and those of Ambedkarites who wanted more militancy.

## Kashiram's Movt Bahujan Samaj Party BSP

- KR quit his job at DRDO and estd SC, ST, OBC and minorities mployees welfare Association in 1971.
- In 1973 he estd Backwar and Minority Communities Employees Federation BAMCEF in 1976.
- In 1980 he created a show named Ambedkar Mela.
- 1981 He started Dalit Soshit Samaj Sangharsh Samiti DS4
- 1984 BSP was founded as a full fledged political party.
- Identified all SC, ST, OBC and Religious minorities as Bahujans.
- Gave impetus to Dalit politics but he Identified them only on Basis of caste and community.
- Idealised Ambedkar as a strategist.
- KR approves of his sole ideology that political power of his party could solve all dalit problems. Hardly cared for democracy.
- Did not have a manifesto and wanted to maximise power by nay means.
- Wanted to replicate Ambedkars movt of 1920s.

## Untouchability Offences Act 1955

- To spell out Article 17 of constitution.
- Penalises manifestation of untouchability in any form
- Provides penalties for the offences like preventing use of public spaces viz temples etc
- Prevents Enforcement of social disabilities.

Dalit movements

1. Discuss the factors that led to the growth of Dalit consciousness and mention the major
movements aimed at their empowerment. [2010, 30m]

2. "In exercising its exclusive power, the Parliament additionally enacted the Untouchability
(Offences) Act in 1955." Comment. [2008, 20m]

3. "Dalit Movements for empowerment in independent India have essentially been for
carving out political space through electoral politics." Discuss. [2014, 10m]

4. Analyse various trends in Dalit Movements in various parts of post-independent India.
[2018, 20 Marks]
