# Republics and Monarchies

2020-04-27 11:45:11

```toc
```

---

## Sources

- *Epics such as Mahabharata mentions Ganas* as there being unity among people. With time they became powerful and its people properous. They could be destroyed only by internal conflicts.
- Buddhist *Sanskrit and Pali canonical* mentions about Licchavis of Vaishali and give extensive details about them.
- *Mahanibbana Sutta and Avadana Shatak* mentions that there was a republican form of govt.
- *Greek records of Diodorous* mentions that most cities in North West India were under a democratic form of govt. *Arrian also mentions* this. Ex Mallas
- Ashtadhyayi of Panin and Arthashastra

## Ganas

Various examples of non monarchial states in ancient India as given by certain states are :
	- Arjunayanas
	- Uddehikas
	- Malavas
	- Yaudheyas
- Ganas were more of a **tribal organisation** than monarchies.
- Gana were further of 2 types :
    - Where they consisted of a section of one clan eg Sakya and Koliyas.
    - Those that comprised a confederation of serveral clans. Eg Vajjis and Yadavas.
- Buddhist texts such as **Ekapanna Jataka** and **Chullakalinga Jataka** suggest that Lichachhavis had a large assembly consisting of head of Kshatriya families.
- These assemblies were sovereign and did not include women. Their standing armies were smaller than the Monarchial ones.
- Voting was dones on wood known as salakas collected and counted by a salaka-gahapata.
- Gana puraka was responsible for ensuring the presence of a quorum.
- Clan exercised rights over land and private property may have been absent.

### Vajji of Vaishali

- Was a confedary of Licchavis, Vajjis, Videhas, Jnatrikas.
- Mentioned in Buddhaghoshas Sumangala Vilasinicontemporary texts refer to them as a Ganasamgha a republic or an oligarchy ruled by group of Kshatriya chiefs.
- represented a confederacy of eight clans of whom the Videhas, Licchavis and the Jnatrikas.
- Mahavira belonged to the Jnatrika which was a clan inside of Vaishali.
- The capital of Licchavis was vaishali.
- Other members of the confederacy were Ugras, Bhogas, Kauravas and Aiksavakas.
- They did no have a standing army or a system of revenue collection from agriculture.
- Ajatsatru destroyed them with the help of his minister Vassakara.

### Mallas of Kusinara and Pava

- Kshatriya lineage referred to as Ganasamghas, their headquarters in the towns of Pava and Kusinagara
- Buddha died near Kusinagara and his last rites were performed by the Mallas.allies with Vajjis, was originally Monarchial.

### The Shakyas of Kapilavastu

- Buddha belonged to this clan.
- They had a federal constitution and the head was elected and given the title of King.
- Every adult participated in its administration and all important matters were decided by their assembly.
- The state of Kosala occupied it later.

---

[[fess105.pdf]] - Kingdoms, Kings and an Early Republic | Our Pasts.

---


1. Trace the rise of Magadhan imperialism up to the times of the Nandas with particular reference to its policy towards the non-monarchical state. Discuss the factors that contributed to its success. [1990, 60m]
- [Rise of Magadha and Nandas](onenote:[[Rise]]%20of%20Magadha%20and%20Nandas&section-id={27B0F6C8-0CAF-4E34-BF56-5CB9AD14C82B}&page-id={7B62C439-02FA-4131-B409-36F779E1BDD5}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20I/Mahajanapadas.one)

1. Give an account of the republics in the pre-Maurya period. Discuss the factors which contributed to their decline. [1992, 60m]
- [Republics and Monarchies](onenote:[[Republics]]%20and%20Monarchies&section-id={27B0F6C8-0CAF-4E34-BF56-5CB9AD14C82B}&page-id={5206E917-9496-4617-92D3-1BFE5964C5EC}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20I/Mahajanapadas.one)
- [Vajji](onenote:[[Formation]]%20of%20States&section-id={27B0F6C8-0CAF-4E34-BF56-5CB9AD14C82B}&page-id={81934C3C-8135-48B9-9B47-3886F245D8A9}&object-id={635544B6-98A9-4FE9-BE98-2BE15A9688FE}&83&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20I/Mahajanapadas.one) , [Malla](onenote:[[Formation]]%20of%20States&section-id={27B0F6C8-0CAF-4E34-BF56-5CB9AD14C82B}&page-id={81934C3C-8135-48B9-9B47-3886F245D8A9}&object-id={635544B6-98A9-4FE9-BE98-2BE15A9688FE}&93&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20I/Mahajanapadas.one), Sakyas of Kapilavastu before being taken over by Kosala

1. Give an account of gana-sanghas (non-monarchical state systems)? Why did they decline? [2018, 15 Marks]
- [Republics and Monarchies](onenote:[[Republics]]%20and%20Monarchies&section-id={27B0F6C8-0CAF-4E34-BF56-5CB9AD14C82B}&page-id={5206E917-9496-4617-92D3-1BFE5964C5EC}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20I/Mahajanapadas.one)