# Rise of Urban Centres

2020-04-27 11:45:44

```toc
```

---

## Rise of Urban Centers:

- 2nd urbanization
- urban centre - place where most powerful and visible sections of popu engaged in activities other than food production
- urban society - craft specialists, rich poor people and state adm
- inc agri production - inc use of iron tools practice of wet rice cultivation in the middle Gangetic Valley
- Large no of iron tools have been found in Ujjain, Sravasti and Hastinapur
- Increase iron tools also improved warfare and the want to control more territory further bringing in more land into cultivation for the want of greater wealth.
- productivity/yield per acre of rice was more than that of wheat which meant more food surplus to appropriate leading to the dev of non-food based occupations and sustenance of larger population.

### Types of Cities Mentioned

- Books like the Divyavadana and Apastamber Dharmasutra provide us with an idea of the city in those times very idealistic depiction.
- Pura - in early vedic period it meant fortified settlements or temporary place of refuge later it came to be known as a main city.
- Durga - denotes a fortified capital of a king.
- Nigama - it meant a merchant town, coins with the legene 'Nigama' has been found. Section of a city were also called Nigama where cradt specialists used to live.
- Nagara - was used first in the Taittiriya Aranyaka it refers to a city. It combined the political function of the Pura and commercial function of the Nigama.
- Rajdhani → Capital city
- Nagaraka → small town
- Mahanagara → big cities viz Champa, Rajgriha, Shravasti

#### Coins and Trade

- Various kinds of traders: shopkeepers (apanika), retailers (KrayaVikrayika) and money investors (Setthi-Gahapati)
- Coins came into use in this period for the first time in ancient India, were punchmarked coins.
- Coins promoted organised commerce, they bear various kinds of symbols on one side and were issued by merchants led to the rise of money lending class.
- The coin of highest value was the silver satamana. This was followed by the Karsapana. The copper masas and kakani were coins of smaller denomination

#### City Life

- Early Buddhist texts like **Vinaya Pitaka** suggest about **Kutis** or hamlets forming villages.
- Pali texts refer to gamas/gramas of park attendants, carpenters, reed makers etc. Terms like gama-gamani and gamika refers to village headmaen and overseers.
- A marked increase of iron artefacts can be seen at NBPW levels. Large landholdings have been mentioned some of them were Brahmadeyas as mentioned in Samyutta Nikaya.
- Idea of private property had developed as suggested by Vinaya Pitaka and Anguttara Nikaya. Kings had large tracts of lands. Land was also an imp source of revenue.
- Buddhist texts mentions dasas, dasis and Kammakaras and working in households.
- Atranjikhera shows an overlap of PGW and NBPW phase suggesting a transition phase from village to towns. size of settlements increased.
- Northern Black Polished ware s one of the indicators of the broad cultural uniformity in the Gangetic Valley towns of the 6th century BC.

### Impact of Iron Technology on Mahajanpadas

```ad-Views

**DD Kosambi** suggested that the westward expansion of the Indo Aryans was to access the iron ores of south Bihar. This is why Magadha dominated.

**RS Sharma** highlighted role of iron axes in clearing forest of Ganga valley which led to the 2nd phase of urbanisation.

**Makkhan Lal** argued that no significant inc in used of iron was there and Ganga plains remained forested till late 16th 17th century.

```

- Use of Iron increased **gradually over the centuries** and massive deforestation of Ganga valley took place in the **Colonial** period.
- Its beginning could be dated to **800BC**. Kodumanal which has yielded Tamil-Brahmi writings on pothserds is imp for South India dated around 500BC.
- Cities had diff functions ex trade, political control, craft, production etc. It foundation were laid in :
    - estd of firm agricultural base to maintain surplus
    - Population increased
    - Increased craft specialization, trade and beginning of use of money → social complexity
    - Political leadership → centralisation


1. Trace the development of urbanization from the third millennium B.C.E. to 6th century B.C.E. [2011, 60m]
- [Rise of Urban Centres](onenote:[[Rise]]%20of%20Urban%20Centres&section-id={27B0F6C8-0CAF-4E34-BF56-5CB9AD14C82B}&page-id={BA53C740-1AF9-42B9-8EF6-CDCDE4D59AE3}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20I/Mahajanapadas.one)

1. What role did iron play in changing their political and economic life? [1998, 60m]
- [Impact of Iron technology :](onenote:[[Rise]]%20of%20Urban%20Centres&section-id={27B0F6C8-0CAF-4E34-BF56-5CB9AD14C82B}&page-id={BA53C740-1AF9-42B9-8EF6-CDCDE4D59AE3}&object-id={462DE6B7-8D17-45F1-B2F7-BFBE2B46B835}&13&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20I/Mahajanapadas.one)


1. Evaluate the introduction of iron technology in the development of human history of ancient India. [2011, 20m]
- [Impact of Iron technology :](onenote:[[PYQs]]%20and%20Answers%20&section-id={27B0F6C8-0CAF-4E34-BF56-5CB9AD14C82B}&page-id={235D41E2-2497-4945-AB29-978F2052A17E}&object-id={02957E22-5988-41A5-9886-FA28386138B0}&F&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20I/Mahajanapadas.one)