# Spread of Jainism and Buddhism
2020-04-27 11:46:24
            
---

## Rise of new religious ideas

-   Vedic religious practices become cumbersome, elaborate, expensive, meaningless ceremonies.
-   established the domination of the Brahmanas in the society
-   new economic groups emerged, wielded more political power than before, opposed the position of the Brahmanas on the basis of heredity.
-   Buddhism and Jainism did not give much importance to notion of birth it attracted Vaisyas to its fold.
-   **Kapila, Makkali Gosala, Ajita Kesakambalin and Pakuda Kachchayana** had already highlighted the evils of the Vedic religions before Buddha and Mahavira but they were the first to have provided an alternate religious order.


### Origin of Buddhism 

-   Buddha was born to Suddhodhana of the Sakyas and Maya of the Koliya clan in Lumbini/Rumindei.
-   saw an old man, a sick person, a dead body and an ascetic.
-   wandered for 6 years learnt from Alara Kalama the technique of meditation and teachings of the Upanishads.
-   resorted to self-torture to find truth, abandoned this went to Uruvela/Bodh Gaya and sat under the pipal tree attaining Enlightenment on the **49th day** of his continuous meditation.
-   **first sermon at Sarnath** known as Dharmachakra Parvartana.
-   **Asvajit, Upali, Mogallana, Sari-putra and Ananda** were the first five disciples/arhats of Buddha
-   Kings like **Bimbisara, Ajatasatru (Magadha), Prasenajita (Kosala) and Udayana (Kausambi)** disciples and contemporaries
-   age of 80 (486 B.C.) he **died at Kusinagara**

#### Teachings of Buddha 

-   Four Noble Truths
    -   world is full of **suffering/Dukkha**
    -   All **sufferings have a cause**: desire, ignorance and attachment are the causes of sufferings
    -   they be **removed by destroying its cause**.
    -   In order to end sufferings **one must know the right path** which is the **eightfold** path or the **Ashtangika Marga**.
-   Eight fold path consists of -
    -   Finding the right view
    -   Right aim
    -   Right speech
    -   Right action
    -   Right livelihood
    -   Right effort
    -   Right mindfulness
    -   Right concentration
-   emphasis on the **law of 'karma'** a/c to this present is determined by the past action. If the individual has no sin he is not born again.
-   Buddha preached **'nirvana' as ultimate goal** of life it meant shedding of all desires and ending sufferings.
-   Buddha neither accepted nor rejected the existence of God he was more concerned about the individual and his actions.
-   He emphasized spirit of love, following ahimsa. An individual is to follow the middle path as both luxury and asceticism is to be avoided.
-   His attack on the caste system and the supremacy of the Brahmins was welcomed by the people of the lower orders. There was no need for middle man to achieve nirvana.
-   Buddha **rejected the authority of the Vedas** and **condemned animal sacrifices and meaningless rituals**.
-   Buddhist teachings are compiled into Sutta, Vinaya and Abhidhamma Pitakas.

### Rise
-   Apart from Sutta and Vinaya pitaka detailed hagiographies are contained in the **Lalitavistara**, **Mahavastu**, Buddhacharita.
-   teaching were a way of life to reach salvation and thus was more than just philosophy.
-   Core of his doctrine was the **Ariya sachchani** or Four Noble truths Suffering ie Dukkha, cause or samudaya, removal or nirodha and Atthanga magga Eight fold path the way of achieving this calle the middle path
-   Another imp aspect of Buddhas teaching was **patichcha-samuppada** : expalnation of all phenomena and of Dukkha. The elements of this called **nidanas** were represented in a wheel.
-   ultimate goal of the Buddha's teaching was the attainment of **nibbana** which meant extinction of desire. Parinibbana meant death.
-   In Majjhima Nikaya  Buddha uses the analogy of the raft to explain that the dhamma he taught was a means of attaining an end. #GS4
-   Buddhist emphasis on ahimsa involved a critique of Brahmanical animal sacrifices
-   monastic order of monks, and ultimately also of nuns, was created within the Buddha's lifetime
-   Vinaya Pitaka gives an account of the estd of Sangha and rules that govern it.
-   Vinaya Pitaka has two main sections-the *Sutta Vibhanga* → that has Pattimokkha a set of rules and Khandaka. It regulated the monks and nuns and defined the relation b/w Sangha and laity.
-   Members of the Sangha taught dhamma to the laity. For the laity giving dana/alms lead to accumulation of punya/merit.
-   The male followers of laity were called **Upasakas** and the female followers were called upasikas. #PrelimsPYQ  ^wz5yxe
-   Buddha's doctrine was more socially inclusive than the Brahmanical one but it did not aim the abolishing of social differences. He saw social relationships as fetters.
-   Buddhists considered varna as man-made ordering. Most monks in were either Kshatriya or Brahmanas belonging to families of high status.
-   One of the reason for this was that there was internal dissension among the Brahmanical fold as not all Brahmans were ritual specialists.
-   Monks could take food from anyone irrespective of their social hierarchy.
-   Buddha's dhamma must have appealed to the laity because it offered a coherent code of conduct.
-   Nibbana was possible for women too. Buddhist texts were stereotypical of the women.
-   It was not open to pregnant women, mothers of unweaned children, rebellious women.
-   Samyutta Nikaya refers to Khema and her discourse to king Pasenadi. Anguttara Nikaya about Dhammadinna. Therigatha consists of 73 poems and is supposed to have been composed by 72 nuns.

### Spread 

-   spread fast in Magadha, Kosala and Kausambi. In republics of Sakyas, Vajjis and Mallas also followed the process. It appealed to large masses due to
    -   Emphasis on practical morality, simple philosophy, social equality. #GS4 
    -   Merchants like Ananthpindika and courtesans like Amrapali accepted the faith because they were respected in it.
    -   Use of popular language ie Pali.
    -   patronage extended by kings
    -   Sangha organised the spread very effectively
-   Sangha was the religious order membership was open **to all above 15 yrs of age**.
-   **Criminals, lepers and persons affected by infectious diseases were not given admission** into the Sangha.
-   Ananda and his foster mother Mahapatapati Gotami requested the admission of Women into the sangha fold.
-   During the rainy season they **took shelter called as vasa**.
-   Sangha promoted education among the people.
-   It was governed by democratic principles


### Buddist Councils -
-   **1st Buddhist Council** was held in 483 B.C.E. in the Saptapmi cave near Rajagriha 3 months after the death of Buddha. Mahakassapa presided over the assembly. 
	- Ananda and Upali were other leading personalities.
	- Its agenda was to preserve the teachings (Sutta) and monastic disciplines / Vinaya.   
	-   All the teachings of Buddha were divided into two Pitakas. the Vinaya Pitaka and the Sutta Pitaka.
	-   Vinaya Pitaka was established under the leadership of Upali and those of Sutta Pitaka was settled under the leadership of Ananda.
	- Sutta, Vinaya and Abhidhamma pitakas were recited in the council.
-   **2nd Buddhist Council** was held at Vaishali in 383 B.C.E. 
	- Council was presided by Sabbakami under the patronage of Kalasoka.
	- Dispute arose on the 10 points of monastic discipline that was to be followed.  
	- monks of Vaisali and Pataliputra had accepted certain rules which were declared as contrary to the teaching of Buddha by the monks of Kausambi and Avanti.
	-   Council failed to bring about a compromise leading to the formation of Sthaviravadins and Mahasangikas. Stharviravadins were orthodox and followed Vinaya Pitaka.
-   **3rd Buddhist Council** was held in 253 B.C.E. at Pataliputra during the reign of Asoka under the chairmanship of Moggaliputta Tissa.
	- Its objective was to reconcile different schools of Buddhism and purify the Buddhist movt from opportunistic factions that only wanted royal patronage.
	-   Attempt was made to free Buddhist council from dissidents and innovation. Many monks were expelled.
	-   Philosophical interpretations of the doctrines of Buddha were collected into Abhidhamma Pitaka. The last chapter of Abhidhamma Pitaka, Kathavatthu had questions and disputes recorded on it. 
	- Abhidhamma Pitaka was compiled and Tripitika was formed. 
-   **4th Buddist Council** was held  in 72 A.D. during the reign of Kanishka in Kashmir and was presided by Vasumitra and Ashvaghosa was his deputy. 
	-   It compiled three commentaries (Vibhashas) on each of the three Pitakas. 
	- It decided certain controversial questions of differences that arose between the Sarvastivada teachers of Kashrnir and Gandhara.
	- A settlement of dissidence was done and the council recognized all 18 sects as the repositories of genuine buddhavachana.
	- This council was a gathering of Hinayanists of North India.

## Jainism

### Rise of Jaininsm 
-   Parshvanath believed in the eternity of matter. He advocated 4 principles
    -   Truth
    -   Non Violence
    -   Non possession
    -   Not to receive anything not voluntarily given eg Brahmacharya
-   Teachings of Mahavira - He believed that soul(jiva) and matter(ajiva) are 2 basic elements. Soul can be liberated with means of continued efforts.
-   Moksha can be attained by observing the following 3 principles
    -   Right belief
    -   Right Knowledge
    -   Right Action
-   advocated a life of severe asceticism and extreme penance
-   believed that the world was not created by any supreme creator
-   all objects, animate and inanimate had a soul
-   rejected the authority of Vedas and objected to Vedic rituals
-   The following had to be observed by a householder :
    -   non-injury
    -   non-stealing
    -   non-adultery
    -   speaking the truth
    -   non-possession
-   householder should feed cooked food to the needy everyday
-   Teachings were contained in 14 old texts known as purvas. Sthulabhadra divided the Jaina canon into 12 angas or sections. Digambaras refused to accept this change.
-   At 2nd council at Vallabhi new addition in the form of Upangas or minor sections were made. Held in 512 AD. It was presided by Devardhi Kshemasarmana. By this time the 12th Anga of the 1st council was lost.
-   Among the 12 angas the Acharanga sutta - code of conduct for the monks and Bhagavati sutta - later expounds of Jaina canon, are the most important.


### Spread 
-   Mahavira had eleven disciples known as Ganadharas or heads of schools
-   Arya Sudharma was the only Ganadhara who survived Mahavira and became the first 'Thera' (chief preceptor) of the Jaina order
-   The sixth Thera was Bhadrabahu.
-   was given royal patronage by Udayin the successor of Ajatshatru. Chandragupta Maurya travelled to the south with Bhadrabahu to spread Jainism. Monks could have been seen during the invasion of Alexander on the banks of river Indus.
-   They used popular dilect Prakrit.
-   The 3rd council was held after the return of Bhadrabahu from Shravanabelagola in Pataliputra iaround 300 BC. In this teachings of Mahavira was divided into 12 angas.
-   It split into Digambaras and Shvetambaras.
-   During later year more splits took place the ones who devoted worship of the scriptures were called Terapanthis among Svetambaras and the Samaiyas among the Digambaras.(6th century AD)
-   Jaina doctrine is much older than the Buddhist one. Jaina means **victor** teaches to attain **moksha**.
-   Jaina conception of time consists of an endless sequence of half-cycles called utsarpinis and avasarpinis(regressive happiness) lasting vast amount of time.
-   Rishabhadeva was the 1st tirthankara. Neminatha was 22nd, Prashvanath was 23rd and 24th was Mahavira born 250 yrs after Parshvanath.
-   Jinas had superhuman insights and knowledge.
-   Acharanga Sutra tells about the life of Mahavira.
-   Jaina doctrine says that **reality  is manifold/anekanta**. Everything has **3 aspects substance (dravya), quality (guna), and mode (paryaya)**.
-   anekantavada (doctrine of the manifold) holds that reality is very complex and has multiple aspects.
-   Syadavada (the doctrine of maybe) emphasize the relativity of all knowledge.
-   Reality cannot be grasped in its entirety.
-   There are infinite beings called jivas and have 3 main qualities conciousness(chaitanya), bliss(sukha) and energy(virya) who transmigrate to Karma
-   **triratna** (three gems) of Jainism consists of **right faith (samyag- darshana)**, **right knowledge** and **right conduct(samyog-charitra)**. It also has 5 vows for monks and nuns.
-   Ahimsa is central to Jainism.
-   Jaina texts also criticize Brahmanical sacrifice and stereotype women.


## Influence of Upanishadic thought on Heterodox sects  
- [x] #todo 
- What  are Upanishads?  What are Heteredox/ Nastika sects?
- Upanishadic thoughts are ideas, values and modes of thinking that have beginnings from Upanishadic texts. 
- Birhadaranyak, Chandogya and Aitreya were pre Buddhist. Both Up and B texts believed in undesirability of worldly existence and wanted liberation from it. Both disregarded priestly rites and rituals.
- Monier Williams - Buddha was a metaphysician and had great sympathy w/ Up philosophy.
- Albrecht F Weber - Teaching in B  is absolutely nothing new, is entirely identical and corresponding w/ Brahmanical doctrines.
- other historians like Ranade and Mahadevan say that they merge into each other.
-  Oldenberg says not even one philosophy was known to Buddha.
-  Identification of self w/ the world and not w/  one of the 5 factors of existence/Khandas seems borrowed from Up.
-  Early Buddhists might  not have been acquainted w/ Up.

---
[[fess106.pdf]] - New Questions and Ideas


----

