# Rise of Magadha and Nandas

2020-04-27 11:46:53

```toc
```

---

## The Factors that May Have Led to the Success of Magadha Are

- Favorable **geographical position** viz Rajgrih surrounded by hills and Pataliputra by rivers on 3 sides.
- Rivers provided trade routes
- Freedom from Brahmanical orthodoxy
- Monopoly over iron ores per DD Kosambi but this was not the case
- Fertile soil and access to timber and elephants
- Access to rich mineral assets of Chotanagpur area
- Effective extraction and deployment of resources.

### Socio-economic Background up until the Rise of Ashoka

- Use of iron increased agricultural surplus leading to more prosperity and urbanisation marked by an increase in coins and trade throughout the region.
- Urban people wanted more social mobility within society which was not provided by the Brahmanical 4 fold varna system thus they took to other heterodox sect
- Tribal areas around periphery were brought under the social strata they needed to be placed somewhere appropriate in social hierarchy

### Religious Condition

- Brahmanical varna system was rigid and gave very little scope of upward social mobility to the lower classes and the vaishyas who had emerged as economical powerhouses and were looking for higher position in society.
- Priestly domination and increased ritualisaiton Brahmanical religion were questioned
- Buddhism provided an alternative to this and people took with both arms open.

### Polity

- Political supremacy of Magadha was clearly established over the sub-continent, the territory was a culmination of varying regions, cultural areas etc
- Monopoly of ruling class, appropriation of surplus and existence of administrative policy
- Polity had become complex and required sophisticated measures to work efficiently

## **Haryanka Dynasty**

### Bimbisara ( 544 BC - 492 BC )

- Magadha's gradual rise to political supremacy began with **Bimbisara**. But he was not the founder of his dynasty as suggested by Mahavamsa.
- Per Ashvaghosha's Buddhacharita Bimbisara belonged to the Haryanka family.
- He used matrimonial relation for furthering his reign. He had matrimonial relations with Kosala, Videha etc and received Kasi as dowry
- Had cordial relation wvith Avanti and annexed Anga.
- Ajatshatru starved him to death and usurped power in 492 BC

#### Administration Under Bimbisara :

- **Mahavagga** suggest that Bimbisara had a very large kingdom. VIllages governed by assemblies under village headmen called Gramakas. High ranking officials called Mahamatras had executive, judicial and military functions.
- Jains text Uttaradhyana Sutra said he visited Mahvira and was a devoted follower.
- Buddhist text like Sutta Nipata claimed he was follower of Buddha. He is considered as an imp figure in early Buddhism.

### Ajatshatru (492 B.C. to 460 B.C)

- The steady expansion of Magadha continued under Ajatashatru, conflict with **Kosala**'s king Prasenjit was an important part of this process.
- major success for Ajatashatru was his victory over the Lichchhavis. He sent Vassakara on an undercover mission to create dissension. It was a protracted struggle but Magadha won. He also defeated Chanda Pradyota of Avanti.
- Bharhut carving of 2nd century BC shows him visiting the Buddha. He hosted the 1st Buddhist council at Rajagriha.
- during his reign Kasi and Vaisali, the capital of Vajji Mahajanapada, had been added to Magadha, making it the most powerful territorial power in the Ganga Valley

### Udayain (460-444 B.C.)

- Buddhist and Jaina texts mention **Udayin** as the successor of Ajatshatru who was again was succeeded by Nandivardhana and Mahanandin as per Puranas. Buddhist texts mention different rulers.
- He extended the kingdom northwards towards the Himalayas and south towards the Chotanagpur plateau.
- He and the next 4 rulers of this dynasty were the weaker ones
- In 413 BC they were usurped by the people of Magadha and Shishunaga was put to throne.
- He built a fort on the confluence of Sone and Ganges

## **Shishunaga Dynasty** Shishunaga (413 BC - 395 BCE)

- He came from a high ranking family. He had a second capital at **Vaishali/Varanasi?**.
- succeeded over the Haryanka ruler Nagassaka.
- destroyed power of Pradyota dynasty of Avanti defeating Nandivardhana.
- ruled from Pataliputra.
- The kingdoms of Vatsa and Kosala may also have been annexed by him.
- Kalashoka was his successor.
	- Reign saw the shifting of the capital to Pataliputra and convening of the 2nd Buddhist Council.

## **Nanda Dynasty**

- Puranas call the founder of the Nanda dynasty **Mahapadma**. Buddhist calls him Ugrasena. More information is provided by Greek writer Curtis and Jaina text Parishishtaparvan who call him a barber.
- Beginning of the Historic period in India is often considered as 326 BC the invasion of Alexander and the Nandas are described as the 1st empire builders of India.
- Later Purana writings Mahapadma Nanda is described as the exterminator of all kshatriyas
- Some indication also suggest that they had ventured to the Deccan and South India.
- His conquest of Kalinga and building of a canal there is mentioned in the Hathigumpa inscription of Kharavela.
- **Dhana Nanda** was ruling Magadha at the time of Alexanders invasions. Greek accounts of **Curtis** give a description of his army.
- Jaina text mention that ministerial office during Nandas period was hereditary and that many ministers had Jaina leanings.
- It came to an end in 321 BC when Chandragupta Maurya took over the throne. A total of 9 Nanda kings have been said to have ruled.
