# Iranian and Macedonian Invasions and Their Impacts

2020-04-27 11:47:00
```toc
```
---

- Achaemenid king **Kurush** or **Cyrus** (558-529 BCE) led a military expedition and destroyed Kapisha city.
- Greek historian Herodotus tells us that India was the 20th satrapy of Persia yielding rich tribute.
- Behistun inscription of Darayavaush or Darius I (522-486 BCE) mentions the people of Gadara/Gandhara, Makran etc.
- Hamadan inscription refers to the Hidus/Hindus.
- Darius' inscriptions at Persepolis and Naqsh-i-Rustom include Hidus and Gandharians among his subjects.
- Darius was succeeded by his son Khshayarsha or Xerxes (486-465 BCE). His troops included Indians.
- Persia declined thereafter but Gandhara and surrounding areas continue to be mentioned as subjects.
- Persian invasion led to introduction of Kharoshti script which was derived from Aramaic. Some historians suggest Persian influence on art and architecture of the Mauryas but this is exaggerated.

## Alexander's Invasion (327-326 BCE)

- The details of his invasion are provided by **Arrian**'s 'Anabasis of Alexader' written in 1st 2nd Century BC. He refers to Aristobulus and Ptolemy as his sources.
- He established a series of outposts in Afghanistan before venturing further into the subcontinent. long and bitter fighting at the walled city of Astes and Aornos.
- In 326 BCE, Alexander's armycrossed the Indus, Ambhi the ruler of Taxila extended support. Porus offered resistance but was overpowered. There was some encounters with Ganas viz Malavas, Kshudrakas etc.
- It led to the creation of the Seleucid principality in the north-west and various greek settlements.

### Impact of Macedonian Invasion

- [x] #todo

<https://selfstudyhistory.com/2015/02/25/iranian-and-macedonian-invasions-and-their-impacts/>
