# CA : April 2019 Onwards
2019-04-28 06:45:27
```toc
```
---

-   Spike-LR Anti-Tank Missiles Israel and Igla-S Very Short Range Air Defence Systems (VSHORAD) Russia
-   Defence [[002 Planning]] Comm.(DPC) recom policy measure to improve preparedness
 - **Hooda document** #report for true security to people. Recomm :
	-   military joint manship (Co Defence Staff) (3 services),
	-   cultural change in defence production (DRDO), defence cyber agency
	-   bring civil [[5.1 Society| society]] family educationists etc to curb radicalisation
-   **Integrated Battle Groups(IBGs)** to be structured : Brigade size, self-sufficient combat function; task, terrain specific w both defence and offensive capabilities.
-   **CoDS (CDS)** : 1st envisaged in Kargil Review #Committee, oversees the coordination of all 3 services. Adv : effective leadership, seamless advice, services chiefs would spend more time on operational role becomes counter-productive
-   Displaced Families of (PoJK) and Chhamb under the PM's Development Package 2015. Will get one time fin assistance, enable them to earn a reasonable monthly income #scheme 
  -   Helping the civil administration is the secondary task of the Armed Forces, **National Crisis Management Comm NCMC** is final authority to decide the no of personnel to be deployed for such task. ^2b0311
-   Border adjustment tax (BAT) on imports in addition to customs levy
-   **Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances** NDPS 1985 made to fulfill treaty obligation of UN; Centre regulates movt, cultivation, declare any substance as narcotics; Both Centre and States appt officers for purpose of #Act. 
  - IN part of 16 bilateral pacts to fight drug trafficking ex SAARC, BRICS Colombo plan, ASOD etc.
	  - SIMS or Seizure Information Management System has data for seizure data
  - Multi Agency Centre MAC common counter terrorism grid under IB made operational in 2001 after Kargil war. 28 orgs are part of it who share real time intelligence input. 
  

##  Organized Crimes link with Terrorism  CA April 2019 - Jan 2019 
2019-05-06 19:44:35
            
---

- Masood Azhar designated global terrorist by UNSC for support JeM funding operating, recruiting for Al-Qaeda in Afghanistan, selling arms ammo. Not acting on terrorists like these was the reason why Pakistan still on FATF Grey list.
- The Sanctions Committee UNSC **Resolution 1267** in 1999. Consequences: assets seized, travel ban, arms embargo, domestic immobilization. 

 

# Static - Security forces, agencies their mandates
2020-10-22 08:12:14
            
---

-   Indian Armed Force
    -   Army, Navy, Air Force, Coast Guard
-   CAPF
    -   Assam Rifles, BSF, CISF, CRPF, ITBP, NSG, SSB


# Static - Linkages of organised crime w/ terrorism
2020-10-22 08:11:51
            
---

-   Sponsors terrorists through smuggling drugs, arms, human beings,
-   Extortion, Kidnapping, counterfeit currency, Hawala,



# PYQ
2020-10-30 16:58:55
            
---


|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |      |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|
| Human rights activists constantly highlight the view that the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 (AFSPA) is a draconian act leading to cases of human rights abuses by the security forces. What sections of AFSPA are opposed by the activists? Critically evaluate the requirement with reference to the view held by the Apex Court. | 2015 |

















