---
#review 
banner: "https://img.freepik.com/premium-vector/archaeology-mobile-application-banner-set-ancient-history-scientist_277904-16749.jpg?w=2000"
---

# 1 Archaeological Sources 
2020-04-18 19:29:21
```toc
```
---

**Archaeology** is study of human activity through recovery and analysis of material culture like artefact, industry and assemblage.
- Key to understand human behaviour and experience and do not change with rise and fall of dynasties or kingdoms.
- Field Archaeology deals w/ exploration and excavation of sites.
- Material Culture at Hastinapur : OCP -> PGW - Flood in Ganga -> NBPW - Massive Fire -> Red, Black on Red ware w/ stamped designs -> Red wares, Glazed wares w/ floral designs.
- Marine Archaeology in Dwarka and Bet Dwarka.
- Dating techniques used are Carbon 14, thermoluminescence,  potassium argon, electron spin resonance, uranium series etc. 
- Chemical analysis of soil.
- Archaeometry : use of measurement to analyse ancient objects/ materials.
- Palaentology, Faunal analysis, Palae-pathology are some of the other techniques. 
- Understanding natural env in which people lived is imp aspect of pre and proto history.
- Palaeo botanical studies analyses relation b/w pollen and minute plant remains viz seeds etc and geological data.
- Processualism : tried to understand culture and cultural process holistically esp in relation to ecology. 
- Post processualism : material culture can be used by social group to disguise existing social relations.
 - Cognitive Archaeology
 - Ethno Archaeology
 - Salvage Archaeology
<!--SR:!2021-09-07,1,230-->

## 1.1 Archaeological evidences supports Mahabharata?
-   Excavations at ==Hastinapur, Kurukshetra, Panipat, Tilpat, Baghpat, Mathura and Bairat== have given evidence of **PGW** dated 1000BCE
-   Matsya and Vayu Purana state flood in Ganga excavation at Hastinapur corresponds to this
-   Medieval writings viz Tarikh i Firuz Shahi and Ain i Akbari mention Indraparstha

## 1.2 Challenges wrt translating archaeological cultures into history
-   need not necessarily correspond to a linguistic group, political unit, clan, tribe etc.
-   Explaining change in material culture especially pottery tradition is difficult
-   In India, incorporating arch evidence into historical narrative is difficult

## 1.3 Exploration
2020-04-20 00:13:47
            
---

- Searching for the purpose of discovery of information or resources in an unfamiliar area 
- But in the context of Archaeology it is searching for information from an area of historical information
- ASI leads exploration in India

## 1.4 Excavation
2020-04-20 00:14:17
            
---

- digging to find information of historical significance
-   Most sites dug vertically, Horizontal diggings are expensive
-   Dry areas are better preserved, in Humid areas corrosion etc destroy remains


## 1.5 Epigraphy
2020-04-20 00:14:18
            
---
- Science or study of inscriptions, epigraphist is the person
- Study of old writing in inscriptions is called **Palaeography**
- Sanskrit adopted as epigraphic medium *in 2nd cent AD* widespread in 3rd-4th
-  Ashokan inscriptions are in Brahmi, Kharoshti script was deciphered 1st by **James Princep**
-  Ashokan incriptions of Shahbazgarhi and Mansehra are in Kharoshti script which evolved from Semitic Aramaic script.

### 1.5.1 Advantages and Disadvantages of inscriptions as a source of History
 
Advantages :
-   Durability
-   Information connected to time, place
-   Info on Political structures, administrative and revenue system
-   Genealogies info
-   cults that did not have a literature of their own. Eg Ajivika, Naga etc.
-   dateable info on religious sects, institutions, practices.
-   Source of patronage.
-   Reflect history of language and literature and performing arts ex Kudiyamalai inscription and Inscription of Nataraj temple at Chidambaram

Disadvantages :
-   discovery depends on chance
-   Moveable inscriptions are not always found at their original place
-   confusion due to exaggerated claims ex Gurjara Pratihara and Rashtrakuta king.
-   Sometime genealogies skip names

Various types of Inscriptions are Monuments, Donative inscriptions such as Royal grants, Royal Inscriptions or panegyric ex Hatihigumpa inscription, Allahabad prashasti, Footprint inscriptions etc.

### 1.5.2 Famous inscriptions sites in India :
-   Hathigumpa inscription of Kharavela king of Kalinga, 1st century BC
-   Allahabad prashasti of Samdragupta 4th century CE
-   Junagadh incriptions : mentions the Sudarshana lake and Kings like Ashoka, Rudraman, Chandragupta and Skandagupta.

#### 1.5.2.1 One of oldest inscription 
- in Sub-continent at **Bogaz Koi** dated 1380 BC    
- mentions a treaty b/w Hittite and Mitanni kings
-  mentions the gods Indra, Mitra, Nasatiya and Varuna

#### 1.5.2.2 Earliest stone inscriptions recording land grants 
-  with tax exemptions are **Satavahana** and **Kshatrapa** epigraphs found at **Nashik**
- The mid-4th century **Pallava** and **Shalankayana** grants are the earliest surviving copper plate grants
<!--SR:!2021-09-09,3,250-->

### 1.5.3 Memorial Stones 
-   made commemorating people mostly
-   Most common ones of **dead heroes** or **women who committed sati**
-   In Andhra called **Chhaya Stambhas**
 	- Ex **Nagarjunakonda** here 2 important memorial stone/inscriptions found were :
	-	Of King Chantamula I of Ikshvaku dynasty, ornately decorated showing various parts of his life.
	-   A simpler pillar is of an artisan name **Mulbhuta**.
- Karnataka has the largest concentration of memorial stones.
	-   2 inscription from *Siddenahalli and Kembalu* refer to heroic death of women
	-   Gollarhatti, Atkur and Tambur refer to deaths of pets
<!--SR:!2021-09-09,3,250-->

### 1.5.4 Eras used in the Indian subcontinent
-  To mark imp events usually ascension of Kings and were used in  inscriptions
-   Vikram Era 58 BCE
-   Shaka Era 78 CE
-   Kalachuri-Chedi Era of 248 BCE
-   Gupta Era of 319-320 CE
-   Kollam Era 824 CE in Kerala
-   Chalukya-Vikrama Era in 1076 used in Karnataka

  
## 1.6 Numismatics
2020-04-20 00:14:18
            
---
- Study or collection of currency viz coins, token, paper money, medals etc
- oldest coins in sub-continents are **punch marked, **mostly **silver** some **copper**
-   usually of rectangular, square or round shaped. Most silver puch marked coins weighed 32 rattis.
-   Metrology is measurement and arrangement of coins by weight is imp aspect of Numismatics.
-   Mint towns can be idenfied where large no of coin moulds are found.

### 1.6.1 Coins mentioned in Literary texts
-   Rig Veda words : Nishka, Nishka-griva (gold ornaments) and hiranya-pinda (gold globules) they were not coins 
-   Later Vedic texts mention nishka, suvarna, shatamana and pada
-   Buddhist texts mentions Ashtdhyayi,  Kahapana, nishka, shatamana, pada, vimshatika, trinshatika and suvarna
-   Basic unit was raktika or ratti
-   in South India beans like manjadi and Kalanju used as standard weight

### 1.6.2 Types of  Coins

#### 1.6.2.1 Punch Marked
-   Punch marked coins of North India can be divided into
    -   Taxila-Gandhara type : heavy - single punch type
    -   Kosala mid ganga valley : heavy - multiple punches
    -   Avanti of west India : light and single punched
    -   Magadhan : light and multiple punches.
-   Did not have legends. Symbols on it include geometric designs, plants, animals, sun, wheel, mountain and trees.

#### 1.6.2.2 Cast coins
- made by pouring melted metal into a mold i.e casting
-  **Uninscribed cast**coins made of **copper** and its alloys appeared soon after punch marked coins.
    -   found in *Ayodhya and Kaushambi* during 3rd or early 2nd century. A bronze mould was found in Eran.
	-   Overlapped in time w/ punch marked

#### 1.6.2.3 Die Struck
-  image was pressed into the blank metal disc are mostly post Mauryan
-   Other early Indian coin types were **uninscribed die-struck** coins mostly in **copper** and rarely in **silver** found in *Ujjain and Taxila*  and were minted around 4th century BC.

### 1.6.3 Post Mauryan Coinage 
-   Indo Greek coins were **die-struck** during 2nd/1st century BC
    -   **usually round** few were square or rectangular
    -   **Mostly silver** few in copper, billon, nickel and lead
    -   **Bilingual + bi script** coins were issued w/ obverse in Greek and Reverse in Prakrit usually in Kharoshthi script and rarely in Brahmi.
-   Kushana coins were mostly made of **Gold**, their **silver** coins are rare.
    -   also issued many copper coins of low denominational value, showing wide spread of money economy
    -   Coins had dieties belonging to all religion and pantheons.
-   Non Monarchial states such as Malavas, Yaudheyas, Arjunayanas etc issued cast or die struck coins called janapada. Have 'gana' in their coins.
-   Coins with words **Negama and pancha Negama** meant that they were issued by **merchant guilds** were found in Taxila. Some have names of cities.
-   Satvahana rulers issued **copper** and **silver** coins along with low denominational coins made of **lead** and **potin**. 
	-   Their coins were coins were die-struck and some were cast coins
	-   Legends were in Prakrti language and Brahmi script. But portrait coins used Dravidian language and Brahmi script
-   Post Satvahana coins were issued by Ikshvakus, Shalankayana and Vishnukundin kings were in Lead, Copper. Later the Traikutakas and Kalachuris issued silver ones.
-   W. Kshatrapa coins
	-   Kshatrapa rule **Nahapana** introduced silver curreny in Nashik area
	-    **Western Kshatrapas** coins give dates in Shaka era.
	-    N coins based on Indo Gree silver drachms, obverse had portrait w/ legend in Greek; reverse had dynatic emblem of Thuderbol and arrow.
-    South India
	-   Coins with **legend Valuti** have been assigned to the **Pandyas**
	-   Silver coins **legend Makkotai, Kuttuvan Kotai and Kollippurai** have been associated with **Chera kings**. 
	-   Chera symbols on coins were double fish and tiger and bow and arrow
	-   Coins with lion and bull motif have been associated with **Pallavas** 
	-   Tiger crest is emblem of **Chola** coins
-   Gupta Coins
	-   Gupta Kings issued well executed **die struck** gold coins
	-   Samduragupta and Kumaragupta I had issued coins showing them playing Vina
	-   Reverse of Gupta coins have religious symbols. 
	-   Their purity of gold decreases in later part of Skandagupta's reign
	-   Some **Gupta** coins give regnal years of Kings
	-   Coins showing Marriage of Chandragupta I's marrigae to Lichchavi princess.
	-   Helped prove Ramgupta ruled b/w Samudragupta and Chandragupta II. 
	-   SG coins have him as archer and w/ battleaze and also playing vina. 
-   Coinage during early medieval period
-   Decline in aethitic quality of coins from early medieval period. John Deyell says no decline in volume.
-   Kashmir Hundikas and cowries were popular. 
-   Billon coins circulated in GP kingdom, cowries were also popular during their rules.
-   Copper coins minted by Arab governors. 
-   Kings of Bengal viz Shashanka issued gold coins, Pala-Sena coins have not been identified.  Silver coins called Harikela circulated from 7-13th century.
-   Gold and Silver by Chalukyas of B which was followed by gap of 3 centuries and then revival under later Chalukyas.
- Kadambas of Goa and Shilaharas of West Deccan issued coins.
<!--SR:!2021-09-07,1,230-->

### 1.6.4 Numismatics as source to construct History
-   Imp part of Monetary History -> imp for exchange and trade info/ Economic history.
-   Give info of language and script. 
-   Debasement of coins could also be used as response to inc in demand per Deyell.
-   Need to account for out circulation of coins beyond the border of kingdoms.
-   Numismatic evidence is especially important source of political history b/w **200 BC and 300 CE**
-   Coins of Kshaharata ruler Nahapana was counter struck by Satvahana rulers /**Gautamiputra Satkarni** and **Shiva Satkarni**
-   Most coin moulds were of the Kushana period, disappeared after post Gupta
-   Especially important to construct Indo-Greek history 
-   Guptas Issues largest no of gold coins
-   Balarama and Krishna depicted in Indo Greek kings such as Agathocles. 
<!--SR:!2021-09-09,3,250-->


## 1.7 Monuments
2020-04-20 00:14:18
            
---

- Megaliths such as dolmens, menhirs etc are considered as monuments 
- Buildings such as temples, statues, Stupas, Viharas, Monasteries etc



4. "Reconstruction of Early Indian history is hardly possible without the help of inscriptions and coins." Discuss. [2007, 60m]
-   [What are the advantages and disadvantages of inscrip as a](onenote:[[Epigraphy]]&section-id={CC847531-CFF3-446A-9D8A-1840987282A0}&page-id={CAD137E6-C9D9-4F0E-B3D1-9E820E8AF7ED}&object-id={385EEB5E-BCF0-4F00-A6BA-F2B2BC310045}&2E&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20I/Sources.one)
-   [Numismatics](onenote:[[Numismatics]]&section-id={CC847531-CFF3-446A-9D8A-1840987282A0}&page-id={0A37ACDD-135D-485D-B601-765542B2F80E}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20I/Sources.one)




7. On the basis of contemporary sources assess the nature of banking and usury in ancient India. [2013, 15m]
-   Vedic period (between 1500 B.C. and 1000 B.C.)
 in which the kusidin (usurer) is mentioned
-   Mauryan Period Adesha for loan
-   [coins with words Negama and pancha Negama meant that they](onenote:[[Numismatics]]&section-id={CC847531-CFF3-446A-9D8A-1840987282A0}&page-id={0A37ACDD-135D-485D-B601-765542B2F80E}&object-id={6511CCE7-6378-4711-8233-CB0D393C433E}&6F&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20I/Sources.one)
-   Buddhist Jataka denounces Usury, mentions about lending money
-   Arhtashastra info about interest on various types of loans
-   Dharmashastra - caste imp factor in money lending, profession of vaishyas
-   Manusmriti - approved line of Business, higher ROI for Shudras, lending above mentioned rate is sin





12. Art and culture are reflected to a far greater extent than political history in the epigraphic sources. Comment. [2017, 15 Marks]
-   Refer ANKI : Temple Sites, Cave Sites, Buddhist sites, Jaina sites, Hindu Temples and Caves, Inscriptions Sites.




1.  Describe the distinguishing features of important archaeological cultures of the Indian subcontinent datable between c. 2000 B.C. and c. 500 B.C. [1995, 60m]

A.
-   Refer ANKI : Palaeo, Meso, Neo, Harappan, Chalco, PGW, OCW, NBPW
-   **Indus Valley Pottery**
    -   Coarse handmade pottery
    -   Bowls, Jars, vessels
    -   Red, Orange, Brown, black, cream
    -   Handmade Wheel
    -   Rangpur Culture
        -   BRW painted and high necked jars
        -   evidence of shell working
        -   carnelian and earthern ware
    -   Jhukar
        -   **buff ware** with a red or cream slip with paintings in black shows some continuity
        -   Followed by Jhangar non-urban crude phase
-   Vedic Pottery : Hand-made, unpainted
-   Ochre Coloured Pottery Culture 
-   Cemetery H
-   Gandhara Grave C
-   Chalcolithic
    -   **Ahar Banas Culture :**
		-   BRW
		-   linear dotted designs in white.
		-   Red slipped ware
		-   Bowls - thin incised grooves on neck .
		-   Copper and Iron implements ex Ring, bangles, antimony rods, knife blade etc.
		-   Houses - mud and wood and grass.
		-   Terracotta - naturalistic bull figurines of very fine clay, have prominent humps and long pointed horns.
    -   Jorwe  : **red and orange** with **geometric** patterns painted in black

-   PGW
    -   grey pottery painted with geometric patterns in black
    -   associated with village and town settlements, domesticated horses, ivory-working, advent of iron metallurgy
    -   Ghaggar-Hakra Valley

-   NBPW
    -   luxury style of burnished pottery used by elites
    -   grey ware with linear design
    -   glossy surface and was usually black in colour
    -   made of clay
    -   Give examples of sites

