# Indian Vegetation and Soils

2020-04-29 00:43:47

```toc
```

---

## Natural Vegetation

### Types of Forest

#### Tropical Evergreen and Semi Evergreen Forests

**Evergreen**
	- warm and humid areas; Well stratified
	- annual precipitation of over **200cm** and mean annual temp of **22**°C
	- ex Rosewood, Mahogany, Aini, Ebony

**Semi Evergreen**
	- Mixture of moist deciduous and Evergreen
	- undergrowing climbers provide evergreen character
	- Ex **cedar**, **hollock** and **kail**

#### Tropical Deciduous Forests : Rainfall b/w 70-200cm

- Further divided into **moist** and **dry**
	- Moist Deciduous : rainfall b/w 100-200cm, ex Teak, Sal, Shisham, Hurra, Mahua, Amla
	- Dry Deciduous : rainfal b/w 70-100cm, teak tress interpersed w/ grass, ex Tendu, Palas, Amaltas etc

#### Tropical Thorn Forests

- rainfally less than 50cm ie semi arid areas
- plants are leafless throughout the year
- Ex Date palm, Neem, Khejri, Palas

#### Montane Forests

 1. **Northern Montane**
- Him areas show succesion of vegetation from tropical to tundra
- Lower Foothills have Deciduous forests
- Succeeded by Wet Temperate type at 1000-2000 mts
- In NE and hilly areas of WB from 1500-1750 Evergreen broad leaf trees ex Oak and Chestnut are common; Pine forests are also found here
- Blue Pine and Spruce at 2,225-2048 mts; temperate grasslands also found
- Higher reaches Alpine forest and pastures found at 3000-4000 mts ex Silver Firs, Junipers, Pines, Birch, Rhododenrons found

1. **Southern Montane**
- found in Western Ghats, Vindhyas and Nilgiris
- Vegetation is temperate in higher reaches and Subtropical on lower ones
- Temperate forests are called Sholas in Nilgiri, Anaimalai and Palani hills
- Trees like Magnolia, Laurel, Cinchona, Wattle found

#### Littoral and Swamp Forests.

- 70% area under paddy cultivation
- variety of wetland habitats
- Creeks, stagnant water and tidal flows present, vegetation is salt tolerant
- Ex Mangrove

### Forest Conservation

- Social Forestry : mgt and protection of forests and afforestation on barren land to bring environmental, social and rural dev
	- Urban Forestry : raising trees on public and privately owned land
	- Rural Forestry : promotion of agro and community forestry
		- Agro forestry is raising of trees, agri crops on same land
		- Community forestry aims at providing benefits ex providing jobs to landless classes in forestry
	- Farm Foresty : farmers grow trees for commercial and non commercial purposes

Doabs and Rivers -

| **Name**        | **Rivers**               |
|------------------|--------------------------|
| Sindh Sagar Doab | **Indus **and **Jhelum** |
| Jech Doab        | Jhelum and Chenab        |
| Rechna Doab      | Ravi and Chenab          |
| Bari Doab        | Ravi and Beas            |
| Bist Doab        | Beas and Sutlej          |
| Raichur Doab     | Krishna and Tungabhadra  |

# Soils

2020-04-28 23:46:39

---

## Soil Formation

- Result of Decay and Medium of Growth is mixture of rock debris and organic materials
- Soil Science aka Pedology, soil formation/ Pedogenesis
- 3 layers are
	- Horizon A : topmost zone, where organic material is incorporated w/ mineral matter, nutrients and water
	- Horizon B : transition b/w A and C, very less organic matter
	- Horizon C : composed of loose parent material

### The Soil Forming Factors Are :

- Parent material : ex size fo debris, structure, mineral and chemical composition.
- Topography
	- diff topographic features would have diff exposures to sunlight, drainage etc.
	- Soils will be thin on steep slopes, thick over flat uplands.
- Climate
	- Moisture - Low moisture/humidity leads to salt accumulation in soils -> aridity.
	- Temp - affects chemical and biological activity
- Biological activity ex action of nitrogen fixing bacteria, humus accumulation.
- Time

## Classification of Soils

### Alluvial Soils :

- 40% of total area of country, depositional; nature varies from sandy loam to clay.
- Are rich in **potash** but poor in **phosphorous**.
- Colour varies from light grey to ash grey.
- Khadar is new alluvium and Bhangar is older both contain calerous conc of Kankars.

### Black Soil :

- aka as **Regur Soil** or **Black Cotton soil**.
- Are clayey, deep and impermeable.
- Develop deep cracks and swell when water is added called self-ploughing.
- Absorption and loss of moisture is slow but retains moisture for very long.
- rich in lime, iron, magnesia and alumina.
- also contain potash but lack ==Phosphorous, N2 and organic matter==.

### Red and Yellow Soil :

- Develops on crystalline **igneous rocks** in areas of low rainfall.
- becomes yellow when **hydrated**.
- Are poor in Nitrogen, Phosphorous and Humus.
- fine grained yellow soil is fertile but coarser ones are not.

### Laterite Soil :

- Develops in areas with high **temp** and **rainfall**.
- Due to intense leaching Lime and silica are leached.
- poor in organic matter, Nitrogen, Phosphate and calcium.
- Iron oxide and Potash are in excess.
- crops like Cashewnut etc is grown, not suitable for cultivation.
- used to make bricks, found in higher areas of Peninsular plateau.

### Arid Soils

- Vary from **Red** to **Brown** in colour, are sandy and saline.
- Lack Moisture and humus, Nitrogen.
- Kanker layer is common here.

### Saline Soils :

- also known as **Usara** soils.
- large proportion of **Na**, **K** and **Mg**.
- waterlogged and swampy areas and arid/semi-arid regions.
- Due to capillary action salt gets deposited on the top layer of fertile soils making them saline. To avoid this Gypsum is added.

### Peaty Soil :

- Found in areas of heavy **rainfall** and high **humidity**.
- has high humus and organic content upto 40-50%.
- Normally heavy and black in colour.
- Sometimes be alkaline.

### Forest Soils :

- **loamy** and **silty** on valley sides and coarse grained in upper slopes.
- In snow bound areas they are acidic with low humus content.
- Lower levels they are fertile.

Soil Degradation : decline in soil fertility due to erosion and misuse, degree varies from topography, wind velocity and amount of rainfall.

Soil Erosion : destruction of soil cover when far exceeds soil formation, water and air are the most powerful agents.

## Soil Conservation

- Check open cultivation on slopes.
- Slopes of gradient 15-25% not be used for cultivation.
- Check overgrazing and shifting cultivation.
- Contour bunding, Countour terracing, regulated forestry, controlled grazing, cover cropping, mixed farming, crop rotation.
- Prevent gully erosion through check dams.
- Uncultivable lands be converted into pastures for grazing.
- Stabilize sand dunes in arid areas.
- Central Soil Conservation zone set up for this.

---

[[kegy106.pdf]] - Soils

---

---

[[kegy105.pdf]] - Natural Vegetation

---
