# Art and Culture
2020-04-27 12:00:49

```toc
```
---

## Art

### Mural paintings in India 

-   works on the **walls** or a **solid structure** are referred to as Murals
-   can be dated between 10th century BC and 10th century AD
-   Themes are Hindu, Buddhist and Jain

### Murals at Ajanta 

-   consists of a set of **29** caves, carved in a horse-shoe shape
-   cave no. 9 and 10 belong to the Sunga period
-   Use of tempera style ie use of pigments.
-   Hand gestures, unique hairstyle of female figure, use of emotions even in animals show the portrayal of human values and social fabric.
-   Themes were adopted from Jataka stories.
-   Outlines of the paintings are made in red ochre.
-   Bodhisattvas depicted are Vajrapani → protector of Buddha, Manjusri → manifestation of Buddha's wisdom and Padmapani or Avalokitesvara symbol of compassion.


### Paintings 
-   Murals on walls, doorframes, pillars survives only in Caves 1,2,9,10,16,17. 9 and 10 belong to 2nd/1st century BC
-   2nd phase is of Vakataka period, technique known as fresco secco, used brushes of animal hairs, mud vegetable material applied on rock surface,
-   6 colours used white made from lime, Kaolin and gypsum, red and yellow from ochre, black from soot, green from glauconite, blue from lapis lazuli
-   Narrative scenes of Buddha, Boddhisatva, jataka, yaksha, gandharvas, apsaras
-   Kramrisch - paintings come forward towards the viewer, foreshortening was used, marked by multiple perspective, fine balance b/w material and spiritual perspective
-   Figures are slender, well proportioned, elegant, women have narrow waist, full breasts, faces marked by highly arched eyebrows, elongated eyes
-   Sophisticated costumes, jewellery, hairstyles
-   Bagh - similar to Ajanta, also had paintings, have disappeared

#### Vatsyayana in Kamasutra has mentioned 6 limbs/principles of painting 

-   Variety of form → Rupabheda
-   Portrayal of likeliness of the subject → Sadrisyan
-   Creation of luster and gleam with the colours → Bhava
-   Mixing of colours to resemble the effects of modelling → Varnikabhanga
-   Proportion of the object or subject → Pramanam
-   Immersion of emotions → Lavanyayoganam  Various references to art in painting Brahmanical and Buddist literature :
-   representation of the myths and lore on textiles is known as Lepya Chitra
-   Lekhya Chitra, which has line drawings and sketches
-   Other examples are Dhuli Chitra, Pata Chitra etc.


#### Mudrarakshasa by Vishakhadutta mentions 3 main styles of paintings called patas 
-   Cauka Pata → Isolated framed drawings
-   **Dighala** pata → Long scrolls of paintings
-   Yama pata → Isolated paintings


## Architecture 

- Earliest Gupta rulers were **Buddhist** and Later ones were **Brahamanical**. 
- It was a golden period for Indian Architecture.
- In caves the use of mural paintings on the wall was added.


### Ajanta Caves 

-   Has a total of **29** caves of which **25** were Viharas and **4** were Chaityas.
-   Dated b/w 200BC - 650CE *[under the patronage of Vakataka kings]{.ul}* such as Harishena.
-   Used Fresco painting method showing naturalism. Outlines in red colour. Blue colour is absent. Cave 16 is most elegant.
-   5 caves are Hinayana and 24 are Mahayana based.
-   Fahien and Huen Tsang mentioned them.


### Udayagiri caves(MP) 

-   5th century AD under the patronage of Chandragupta II.
-   sculpture of **Varaha** or **Boar** incarnation of Vishnu.
-   also has caves dedicated to Shiva, Narasimha, Narayana and Skanda
-   All 3 Hindu sects iconography present
-   Most iconic is theVaraha - Boar avatar of Vishnu in Cave 5
-   Shows Vishnu rescuing goddess earth from depths of cosmic ocean
-   inscription belonging to Chandragupta II
-   partly rock cut and partly stone built
-   pillared portico in front, carved doorway, pillars w/ purnaghata capitals,
-   Varaha avatar, 4 armed standing Vishnu , eka mukha linga, pratiharas, Durga Mahishasuramardini, are sculptures found here
 


### Sarnath School of Architecture
-   During the Gupta period, a new school of sculpture developed around **Sarnath**.
-   characterised by the use of cream coloured sandstone and the use of metal.
-   Immaculately dressed and lacked any form of nakedness. Halo around Buddha was intricately decorated. Ex Sultanganj Buddha.


### Mandapeshwar Caves in Mumbai 
- **Brahmanical** cave was later converted into a **Christian** cave; 
- sculptures of Natraja, Sada shiva and ardhanarishwara.


### Religious Architecture
-   Tigawa, Nachna Kuthra, Bhumara, Sanchi stupa, Bodh Gaya temple, Deogarh Dashavtara temple, Dah Parbatia, Brick temple at Bhitargaon, Sirpur, Paharpur
-   Early temples were small, square garbhagriha, doorways intricately decorated,
-   5th 6th century temples built on raised plinth, Deogarh, Bhitargaon had curvilinear Shikhara

##  Sculpture
-   Continuation of Mathura and Gandhara schools, new styles also incorporated
-   Inspired by themes from H, M, Jaina tradition
-   Elaborated and fixed, rich in ornamental designs
-   Vishnu images are varied, combine human and animal forms ex Varaha boar
    -   In Mathura several radiating heads are formed
    -   Shanka, Chakra shown as dwarfish attendants
-   Shiva images show combination of linga and human form
-   Buddha images show variety of mudras than before
    -   Halo is decorated, clothes are transparent
-   Udaigiri in MP
-   Mathura
    -   Seated tirthankaras - headless one of Kumaragupta's reign, background of carved throne, flywhisk attendants
    -   Stone image of seated tirthankara at Kankali Tila at Mathura - stocky body, wide hips, high waist, crossed legs appear tilting forward and downward
    -   Vishnu images and Mukhalinga found
    -   Standing Buddhas
-   Sarnath Buddhas
    -   2 standing figures one seated Buddha - in meditative padmasana, hands in dharmachakra mudra, halo ornamented, flanked by monks in veneration
    -   Diff from Mathura - robes have no fold, yielded many bodhissattva images,
-   Kanheri -
    -   Various Buddah, Bsattava reps
-   Aurangabad - prominence of female imagery suggest tantric or Vajrayana influence
    -   Cave 7 has Tara flanked by 2 female figures accompanied by dwarfs
-   Horse carved out of beige sandstone found at Khairagarh
-   Hadda in Afghanistan use of stucco, figures of Bamyan
-   Metal images
    -   Copper img of Buddha at Sultanganj, similar in style to Sarnath
    -   Hoard found in Chausa, including Rishabhnatha
-   Teracotta -
    -   Small figurines, plaques at Kaushambi, Rajghat, Bhita, Mathura
    -   Motifs are animals, ordinary people, gods, goddesses,
    -   Harwan in Kashmir, Devnimori in Gujarat
    -   Decorated pilasters, jambs, medallions, chaitya arches etc
    -   Bhitargaon brick temple
    -   Life size image of Ganga and Yamuna at Ahichchhatra

## Culture

### Buddhist Culture spread to SE Asia
-   Interaction w/ SL monks continued, Buddhaghosha travelled to SL wrote Vissudhimagga work on Theravada doctrine and meditation
-   In CN shrines and monasteries built, royal patronage under Sui and Tang dynasties, various different schools dev Ching tu was most popular
    -   Kashmiri monks travelled to CN, ex Sanghabhuti, Punyatrata, Dharmayashas, Kumarajiva, Paramartha, Bodhidharma
-   From CN it went to SE asia
-   Sravastivada and Mahayana in North Myanmar 3rd century CE
-   Cambodia - Buddhist and Shaivism taken firm root by 6th century similarly in Java Sumatra
-   Mahayana and Shravakayana Buddhist in Vietnam by 3rd cent
-   Transmitted to Korea from CN by 6th century
-   From Korea it spread to Japan in 538 CE and soon became state religion
 
 
## Was it a classical age of Art, Culture?
-   Balance b/w sensual and spiritual
-   > JC Harler - remarkable degree of uniformity in temples, stone sculptures, terracotta art all over G empire divides it into Early G, Gupta, late Gupta.
	During late G some world's finest art produced had unique elegance, ability to effectively express higher spiritual states
-   > Herman Goetz described Early G as combination of earthiness, daintiness, strength, elegance, sublime and grotesque
-   Late G - rep of human body became slender, poses more stylised
-   > Joanna Williams - art had strong intellectual flavour, fine balance b/w representational credibility and abstracting tendencies
-   >Walter Spink - Ajanta, Bagh, Dharashiva, Ghatotkacha, banoti Aurangabad caves testimony to fact that Vakatakas were last sponsors and guardians of golden age
     Harisena(Ajanta's patron) death was end of golden age

---
[[fess111.pdf]] - Buildings, Paintings and Books | Our Pasts NCERT.

---
 





