# Economic Conditions
2020-04-27 11:58:13
            
```toc
```
---


## Economy under the Guptas : 


### Agriculture

-   Land under cultivation was called Kshetra, not under it was called Khila, Aprahata etc. Land was not classified.
-   Different areas had different terms for measuring land. Nivartana in Bengal. Terms like Kulyavapa and Dronavapa were also used.
-   Barley, wheat, paddy; Pulses, grams, vegetables were grown as staple. Cotton and Sugarcane were grown as cash crops.
-   District level administration used to sell land to individuals, Land donation to religious establishments were also done.
-   There arose a new class of landowners who did not cultivate land but had ownership rights due to them belonging to the ruling class or higher varna status.
-   The condition of the ordinary cultivators had declined due to the inc in landholders.

#### Irrigation was done in various ways :
-   Through reservoirs such as the Sudarshana lake
-   Through use of channels driving water from wells
-   Use of chain of pots that reached down to water of the hull it was called as Ghati-yantra or an **araghatta.** Banabhatta in Harshacharita mentions its use.
-   Rainwater irrigation was undertaken in Bengal


### Crafts Production and Trade :

-   Ordinary ones included pots, earthen ware, furnitures, baskets, metal tools etc.
-   Luxury goods were made of gold, silver, ivory, silk clothes.
- @  Different varieties of silk cloth, called Kshauma and Pattavastra are mentioned in the texts like Amarakosha and Brihat Samhita
-   Excavations at Taxila, Ahichchhatra, Mathura, Rajghat, Kausambi and Pataliputra have given archaeological evidences.
-   Coins issued were of Gold, Silver, Copper and lead.
-   Nagarasresthi and the Sarthavaha were representatives of merchants.
-   Sreni was a type of a guild of craftsmen or traders to protect their interests.
-   Not all the merchants were wealthy. The Dharmashastras ranks them in different categories. They were supposed to form a jati or caste which was often the case.
-   Craft started declining during this period.








