# Decline of Urban Centres
2020-04-27 11:58:33

```toc
```
---

-   The imp cities such as Taxila, Kausambi, Pataliputra etc ceased to exist after this period.
-   Minting and circulation of coins also decreased during this time.
-   The Landgrants to religious institutions increased during this time.
-   Along with revenue rights the rights to mines and minerals were also granted to the donees.
-   These grants were free from the interference of soldiers and royal officials and the owners could also punish people against offences.
-   Later during the 9th and 10th century these types of grants were being made to the state officials.
-   The rights of the traders and merchants began to be encroached as the economy became closed.
-   Owners passed laws that prohibited the movement of tax paying merchants and peasants to tax free villages.
-   Hieun Tsang, and forged charters attributed to Samudragupta have evidences of this.
-   Roman trade declined and later completely dissapeared after the breaking of the Roman empire.
-   The Persians and the Arabs rose as competitors to trade.
-   Byzantine trade was happening but was not as prominent as the Roman trade. It further declined when they found out the art of manufacturing silk.
-   The Huna invasion wiped out the Central Asia trade.
-   Trade of coastal towns were happening with south east asia and China but pottery, coins and other evidences are absent for this.
-   Long distance trade suffered due to the close economy prevalent during this time. Kathasaritasagar mentions that traders and merchants moved places to avoid paying multiple duties.


## Decline of Coinage 

-   The gold coins in circulation during this time declined.
-   The percentage of gold in the coins issued during this time was only 50% of what it was during the Kushanas or the early Gupta rulers.
-   The Rashtrakutas and the Palas issued no coins.
-   Coin moulds and commercial seals have not been found during this time.
-   However, Punjab, Kashmir and other North Western part has yielded numerous coins.
-   There are evidences of use of Barter and use of cowries for trade.
-   Also the emergence of landgrants did away the need for the use of coins for the payment of salaries of officials.








