# Indian Feudalism
2020-04-27 11:58:40

```toc
```
---

##  Indian Feudalism Debate 
- [x]   #todo
- E Medieval has been labelled as one of crisis, decline, decay etc mostly attributed to advent of Muslim rule.
- Feudalism school described period as an age marked by political fragmentation, transformation of peasants into serfs and decline of urban centres and money economy which happened in both North and South. 
- Segmentary model for south India presents kings as ritual figures w/o royal power like revenue infra and standing army.
- This time was marked by proliferation fo states.  
- BD Chattopadhyay says that there was no dichotomoy b/w lineages and states in E M India and lineage ties were central to political formation.
- Unprecedented military build up, incessant warfare.
- Feudatories or Vassals were subordinate rulers who were obliged to offer allegiance and mil service to suzerains.

##  Salient Features of Indian Feudalism
-   sub-infeudation - Landed intermediaries emerged as consequence of the Vassals of the Kings. A lord vassal relationship emerged.
-   Prevalence of forced labour Vishti. The intermediaries were granted the right to forced labour, mentioned in Chola inscriptions and is called Indian serfdom.
-   Peasants suffered curtailment of their rights reducing them to a position of tenants due to taxation, coercion and indebtedness.
-   Economic coercion and subordination increased to extract surplus. Inscription of Rajaraja Chola mentioned in more than 50 levies.
-   Closed Village economy consisting of immobile peasants, craftsmen and artisans.
-   another theory that opposes theory of Indian Feudalism "The **theory of Autonomous peasant societies**" based on evidence of South Indian sources.
-   Nadus or autonomous peasant societies evolved in south India on the basis of clan and kinship ties
-   Agri production was organised and controlled by the Nattar (the people)
-   They organised themselves into assemblies and members were Velalas or non-Brahmins
-   Nattars emerged as important landed class and Brahmana peasants and they became allies.
-   A/c to this thesis there was self-sufficiency in these villages both these theories agree in on this.






**Indian Feudalism and Land Grants**


38. "Land charters of north India (c. A-D. 750-1200)." Comment. [1995, 20m]
-   [Land Grants](onenote:[[Land]]%20Grants&section-id={2110BA3C-72E8-4577-8193-6ED6C19057D2}&page-id={9175A752-346F-4471-A83D-4C678E0B9052}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Guptas%5eJ%20Vakatakas%20and%20Vardhans.one)




39. Write a short essay on: "The Samanta System" [2006, 20m]
-   https://www.yourarticlelibrary.com/notes/brief-notes-on-the-samanta-system-indian-history/4480




40. Write a short essay on: "Applicability of the term 'Indian Feudalism' to early Medieval Society." [2009, 20m]
-   [SALIENT FEATURES OF INDIAN FEUDALISM](onenote:[[Indian]]%20Feudalism&section-id={2110BA3C-72E8-4577-8193-6ED6C19057D2}&page-id={B5CA8022-2F74-4DEB-9737-86EB54859DD5}&object-id={6902B040-5205-4EFA-A5E0-765F062F7BEB}&39&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Guptas%5eJ%20Vakatakas%20and%20Vardhans.one)




41. What kind of changes were visualized by historians on Indian feudalism? Examine critically. [2012, 30m]
-   [SALIENT FEATURES OF INDIAN FEUDALISM](onenote:[[Indian]]%20Feudalism&section-id={2110BA3C-72E8-4577-8193-6ED6C19057D2}&page-id={B5CA8022-2F74-4DEB-9737-86EB54859DD5}&object-id={6902B040-5205-4EFA-A5E0-765F062F7BEB}&39&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Guptas%5eJ%20Vakatakas%20and%20Vardhans.one)




42. Do the evidences of land ownership at our disposal support the theory of the prevalence of feudalism in early medieval India? [2015, 15m]
-   [SALIENT FEATURES OF INDIAN FEUDALISM](onenote:[[Indian]]%20Feudalism&section-id={2110BA3C-72E8-4577-8193-6ED6C19057D2}&page-id={B5CA8022-2F74-4DEB-9737-86EB54859DD5}&object-id={6902B040-5205-4EFA-A5E0-765F062F7BEB}&39&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Guptas%5eJ%20Vakatakas%20and%20Vardhans.one)
 

 

43. Evaluate the socio-economic conditions from the Gupta Period to 1200 C.E. as gleaned from the various types of grants or dana shasana. [2011, 60m]
-   [Land grants as part of larger social and cultural process](onenote:[[Land]]%20Grants&section-id={2110BA3C-72E8-4577-8193-6ED6C19057D2}&page-id={9175A752-346F-4471-A83D-4C678E0B9052}&object-id={57FDA79F-D41C-4563-88B5-224BFD149328}&F&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Guptas%5eJ%20Vakatakas%20and%20Vardhans.one)
-   [Land Grants as part of economic process :](onenote:[[Land]]%20Grants&section-id={2110BA3C-72E8-4577-8193-6ED6C19057D2}&page-id={9175A752-346F-4471-A83D-4C678E0B9052}&object-id={BB0138DE-2F11-4353-89DD-FD34E2BF0588}&D&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Guptas%5eJ%20Vakatakas%20and%20Vardhans.one)