# Senas

2020-04-27 12:04:25

```toc
```

---

- [x] #todo

## Origin and Sources

- Ruled from Bengal in the 11th and 12th century was founded by Samanta Sena.
- Deopara prashasti mentions that they were Brahmins who embraced arms or became Brahmakshatriyas. They migrated from Karnataka.
- They were samantas under Pala rulers.
- Copper plate inscriptions of Adilpur mention land doantion being made by Keshava Sena along with power to punsh interlopers and tribals.

## Rulers

- Vijayasena was the most imp ruler who expelled Madanpala of Pala dynasty and started the Sena Kingdom.
- Ballal Sena introduced social reforms in Bengal know as Kulinism and also captured Gauda frin the Palas. Had matrimonial relations with Western Chalukyas.
- Lakshman Sena was the greatest ruler of the dynasty. Expanded towards Varanasi, Odisha, Bihar. He defated Jayachandra of the Ghadavala. Later Bakhtiyar Khilji put an end to the dynasty.

## Religion

- Reiligion needs to be seen with the lenses of chaging socio-religious milieu of the time. Esp after the overthrowing of the Pala dynasty.
- Senas were overwhelmingly Hindu and wanted religious reforms against the Buddhist Pala rulers.
- Buddhism has sowed the seeds of equality and democratism in the Bengal society and there was now a centralising tendency among the samantas.

## Sena Art, Architecture and Literature

**Art and Architecture**

- Most renowned is the Dhakeshwari Temple in dhaka.
- They also built a temple in Kashmir known as Sanakara Gaureshwara.

**Literature**

- $ Jayadeva who composed Gita Govinda has been said to been one of th 5 gems of Lakshman Sena. He also founded the Radha Krishna cult. #important
- Other panchratnas were Sarana, Umapathi, Dhoyi and Govardhana.
- Dhoyin wrote Pavandutam
- Bengali and Sanskrit was patronised by them.
- Saduktikarnamrta illustrates the feature of Sena poetry it was written by Lakshmansena
