# CA : Science and Technology

2019-05-04 01:26 :53

```toc
```


- **Global Go To Think Tank** Index released by University of Pennsylvania. #report
- Hog Cholera or Classical Swine Flu happens in Pigs and goats.
- **Enhanced Access and Service Excellence EASE 3.0** for tech-enabled banking features like palm banking for end to end digital delivery and Banking on the go at frequently visited spots like malls, stations etc. #scheme
- 28 Feb is celebrated as national science day to commemorate the discovery of **Raman Effect**. It is a change in wavelength of light when it is deflected by molecules.
- **Ralder X** bomb detection device by DRDO.
- India has 5th largest [[3.1 Coal]] reserves in the world.
- Rapid tests to detect corona infections checks for specific antibodies released.
- **National Innovation Fund NIF** under DST its programs are INSPIRE MANAK, Micro Venture Innovation Fund MVIF, IGNITE annual competition.
- ==**Antibodies** : are proteins secreted by immune cells called B lymphocytes.== **Plasma therapy** is similar to passive immunization but is temporary unlike vaccines. #important 
- **Software Technology Parks of India STPI** : under Meity estd in 1991 boost export #scheme
- **TriboE Mask** : hold electric charge to restrict entry of germs without external power source. Triboelectric charging type of contact electrification.
- [ ] Reverse Vaccinology ? #todo 📅 2023-04-15 
- R&D statistics indicators by DST : Gross expenditure tripled b/w 2008-2018, 0.7% of GDP in 2017-18., 3rd in Publishing, 9th in patent filing. #report
- UV short wavelength than visible light, ==UV-C are most harmful completely absorbed by atmosphere, can kill germs aka UV germicidal radiation UVGI. UV-A has longest wavelength and UV-C shortest.== #important 
- **Quantum Entanglement** : pair or group of particles interact in a way that each particle cannot be described independently of the state of others.
	- Tardigrades show this property.
- RT LAMP test : COVID 19 kit components easily available.
- **LiDAR** : remote sensing methods uses laser light to measure variable distances
- Indian National Space Promotion and Authorization Centre **IN-SPACe** : ==to provide private players use of IN space infra under Dept of Space==, GOI. #important 
	- To act as link b/w ISRO and private space coys. Autonomous body parallel to ISRO with its own board.
- **PC Mahalanobis** : architect of IN statistical sys estd ISI, journal Sankhya, helped estd CSO, NSSO, pilot surveys, optimum survey design etc. Mahalanobis distance -> cluster analysis and classification techniques.
- **4th Gen biofuel** : uses genetically engineered crop that take high amt of carbon and are harvested and converted into fuel.
- **Raman scatter** : molecule scatters incident light from a high intensity source, scattered light is at different wavelengths/colours.
- Pressurized heavy water reactor used **Deuterium Oxide D2O** as its coolant and moderator and unenriched Uranium as fuel.
- Genome sequencing can read bigger chunk of virus genome, trace evolutionary history of virus, track mutation more reliably, does not need primers and probes.
- **Chunauti** : next-gen start up challenge for edu tech, agri tech, fin tech, supply chain, logistics, infra etc. #scheme 
- **Global Innovation Index** - IN 48th, Eastward global shift in locus of innovation towards CN, IN, PHL #report by WIPO.
	- Global Innovation Index 2021 IN 46th.
- **National Initiative for Developing and Harnessing Innovation NIDHI** : program under it PRAYAS Promoting Accelerating Young and Aspiring Innovators Startup was launched. #scheme
- World Solar Technology Summit WSTS by **FICCI** - by ISA.
- **Brain template Atlas** : provide precise reference in individual patients, help understand illness like ADHD, Autism, substance dependence, reliable tracking for brain development.
- **Feluda** : paper based test strip to detect COVID 19 uses CRISPR technology.
- HCNG : reduces CO emission by upto 70%, 5% savings in fuel, lower NO release, engines require min modification, ideal for heavy duty vehicle, better performance. 
	- Disadv : determine H2 Natural Gas ratio is difficult, new infra to make HCNG, high cost
- **Hepatitis C** is a blood borne virus, no effective vaccine, Noble in 2020, 5 Hep virus A B C D E.
- Water on Moon's Southern hemisphere **Clavius crater**, could be from small asteroids or sun's solar winds
- **Gyan Circle** VenturesTechnology Incubation
- **Active Drug Ingredient API** aka Bulk drug is key in any medicine, IN launched Bulk Drug scheme 1 time grant of 70% cost of common facilities 90% in Hill states, max 1000 cr, 1 site per state.
- **PM Wani** : accelerate broadband services #scheme
- ==Covaxin : Bharat Biotech, Covishield - Astrazeneca.== #PrelimsPYQ 
- **M sand** is ==substitute for river sand for concrete construction, produced by crushing hard granite stone==. Well graded, can be controlled easily, no organic/soluble compounds.
- **Flue gas** : any gas exiting a flue/chimney; removal of SO2 is called Flue gas desulphurisation through wet scrubbing, spray dry, wet sulphuric acid, SNOX process, dry sorbent injection system. 
- **Asian waterbird** census by Wetlands International. 
- **Einsteinium** : highly radioactive, Isotope 253 has half-life 20 days, 254 is stable.
- **Stardust 1.0** first commercial space vehicle to run on biofuel by bluShift aerospace.
- **Technical Education Quality Improvement Program TEQIP** #scheme - under MHRD, WB assistance, overhaul quality in Low Income States. Institution and Student based measures like accreditation of courses, governance reforms, improve quality of teaching etc.
- CCEA gave approval to National Technical Textile Mission : 1st component on R&D, promotion and dev of market, export promotion, education training and skill dev.
- Digital Green certificate for EU citizens who are vaccinated, recovered from COVID to travel freely in EU.
- **Aluminium Air Batteries** : utilise oxygen in air by Al Hydroxide solution to produce electricity. Has lower cost, energy dense, offers more range on vehicles, easy to recycle, cannot be charged like Li-Ion.
- **Baikal GVD (Giga Volume Detector)** : underwater neutrino detection observatory.
- Uranium Enrichment is done to raise % level of **U-235** through centrifuge refining. 90% enriched Uranium can be used for Nuclear weapons.
- Experimental Advanced Superconduction **Tokamak EAST** aka 'artificial sun' in China achieved temp 7 times that of sun. Uses Nuke fusion mimic sun it is part of project International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor ITER.
- Cyber Capabilities and National Power #report by International Institute for strategic Studies IISS. US top tier 10yrs ahead of China. IN has made moderate progress.

- Atomic Fission of materials was achieved by focusing laser beams to a tiny spot to create a mega blast of energy. Produces little waste and no greenhouse gas.
- National Engineers day Sept 5 along w/ Sri Lanka and Tanzania to celebrate M. Vivesvaraya's birth day.
- **Isothermal Forging Tech** : Enginnering parts are formed through this, used to make aero-engines.
- **Laser Communications Relay Demonstration LCRD** by NASA to test optical communication in space. Optical communication is smaller, requries less power as compared to Radio instruments.
- Steps taken by govt to inc semiconductor production in India :
	- Fin support upto 50% to set up fabrication units.
	- Centre ans states to work to set up high tech cluster.
	- India semiconductor mission to act as nodal agency for efficient and smooth implementation of schemes
	- Chips to start up program to develope well trained engineers
- Cryptobiosis or anabiosis is a metabolic state of life shown by an organism in response to adverse environmental conditions.
- Xenotransplantation is grafting or transplantating of organs or tissues b/w mem of different species.
- Quantum Communication QC way of connecting 2 places with high levels of code and quantum cryptography that cannot be decrypted or broken.
	- Quantum key distribution or QC works using photons ie particles that transmit light to transfer daya. QKD allows 2 distance users to produce 1 common random string of secret keys.
- **ABHYASHEAT** (High-speed Expendable Aerial Target) DRDO used as target for other missiles etc.
- **International Centre for Automotive Technology (ICAT)** : division of **NATRIP Implementation Society (NATIS)** under the Do Heavy Industries, India. NATRIP (National Automotive testing R&D infra project). #body
- **Technical Textiles** : used for performance + functional properties Eg Medical Textiles, Agro-Textiles for crop protection, protective clothing etc, geotextiles : reinforce embankments limiting floods.
	- World market for it is $250 billion India share is $19 bil.
	- Govt plans include giving out HSN codes, National Textile Mission, 92 Technical textile items have been made mandatory for use by govt.
- FB's new crypto currency **Libra** controlled by Libra association a non-profit, pegged like EU/$ to decrease volatility.
- Superconductivity at room temp (Silver and Gold globules). Superconductor : zero resistance to electricity + **diamagnetism** (repulses external magnetic field).
- **IN based Neutrino Observatory (INO)** for high energy nuclear physics research, funded Do Atomic Energy + DST in Theni District TN.
	- Iron Calorimeter is to be constructed for studying neutrinos. National Centre for High Energy Physics at Madurai.
- **Automatic Facial Recognition System (AFRS)** to be used by Nat. Crime Record Bureau (NCRB) use neural network AI, threat to FR, need to conduct privacy impact assessment, used for not its original purpose, mass surveillance concerns. #scheme
- **Subhash Chandra** #Committee (Inter Ministerial) proposes ban on ==Virtual currencies==; fine up to 25 crore, official digital currency instead, backs blockchain in certain areas;
- **Samudrayaan Project** #scheme :
	- deep ocean mission(DOM) bolster Indian Ocean exploration
	- undertaken by **National Institute of Ocean Technology**;
	- focus on deep sea mining (polymetallic nodules),
	- DOM have desalination plant and submersible vehicle
	- **Deep Ocean Mission** #scheme : focus on deep sea mining, ocean climate change, underwater vehicles and robotics. By Mo Earth Sciences.
	- Components are : Carrying 3 people upto depth of 6000 metres; integrated mining system for polymetallic nodule mining; search flora and fauna; explore hydrothermal minerals.
- **IMPRINT**(IMPacting Research Innovation and Tech) initiative by IISC and IIT to research of immediate help to society mostly engineering challenges #scheme
- **Ucchatar Avishkar Yojana** by MoHRD and other ministries to promote industry sponsored outcome based research that directly impacts needs of industry and improves competitive edge. #scheme
- Railways is upgrading all Link Hoffman Busch coaches with Head on Technology.
- High-temperature (150 C) proton exchange membrane technology fuel cell system dev by CSIR through PPP model under [New Millennium Indian Technology leadership Initiative](https://www.manifestias.com/2019/10/18/new-india-millennium-indian-technology-leadership-initiative/).
- **India Innovation Index** #report by NITI. KTAKA most innovative TN, MAHA, TEL etc SIK DEL top in NE states and UT's.
    - 2020 report Ktaka topped.
- Indigenous Air Independent Propulsion sys developed by DRDO for diesel-electric subs ensures operability w/o surfacing, decreases radar profile.
- **NAVIc** Navigation w/ IN constellation #scheme
	- independent regional navigation satellite
	- has 7 sats - 3 are geostationary and 4 geosynchronous
	- JP has QZSS and Galileo of EU.
- Problems w/ RO plants :
	- deposition of brine along shores.
	- affects flora and fauna due to hypersalinity.
	- construction requirea excess groundwater.
	- Alternatives Low temp thermal desalination LTTD technique.
- IN CBM (natural gas) resources are in ==Gondwana sediments, Damodar, Koel valley and Son Valley=.
- Public Health foundation of IN new #report on **Antibiotic resistance**. Findings :
	- IN one of the top users private sector.
	- has most prescription rate.
	- most among children.
- **Rare Earth Metals**
	- 17 metallic elements includes lanthanides.
	- unique catalytic, nuclear, electrical and magnetic etc properties.
	- Used in lighter, flints, glass polishing to lasers.
	- magnets, batteries, high temp superconductivity.
	- India has given Indian Rare Earth limited IREL monopoly over primary mineral containing Rare Earth Elements. It produces very low amt.
	- Need : Open for private cos, create new Dept for REE to oversee policy formulation, Autonomous regulator to resolve disputes.
- New prototype of one kilogram NPK 57 available in IN last yr definition was changed new def the ==amt of electricity needed to counteract the weight/ grav force acting on a mass==.
- National Mathematics day on Dec 22 on Srinivasa Ramanujan birth anniversary, published 1st paper in Journal of IN mathematical society in 1911 went to Eng in 1914.
- **National Green Corps 'Ecoclub'** launched under by MoEFCC for hands on experience to school children about env, #scheme
- **SnowEx** 5yr program by NASA address snow remote sensing through airborne campaigns and field work.
- National Children Science Congress NCSC held in Thiruvananthpuram, for children b/w 10-17 yrs under DST.
- **Indian Science Congress ISC** by ISC Association since 1914.
- Scientific Social Responsibility SSR #scheme harness latent potential, individual scientists will be req to devote 10 person days per yr for sharing knowledge to society.
- **Li-S battery** : has 5x capacity of traditional Li-ion battery is also cheaper. problem -> sulphur electrode would break after repeated charge cycles use of polymers prevent this.
- **Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO)** #important
	- project has 3 gravitational wave detectors 2 at Hanford Washington (one of them to come to India) and 1 at Livingston Louisiana.
- First Gov owned **waste-energy plant** was commissioned in Mancheswar Odisha. Advantages :
	- Pre segregation of waste not required; drying of waste not req; waste processed and reformed in 24 hours; no biological decomposition.
- Starship is rocket by SpaceX, is fully reusable transportation system.
- **Geospatial Energy Map of India** : enables visualisation of energy installation ex conventional power plants, oil wells, petroleum refineries etc. By NITI and ISRO.

## Nobel Prize

2020-01-08 11:26:57

---

### Nobel 2019

- Nobel Prize started in 1901 had originally 5 disciplines Physics, Chemistry, Medicine, Literature and Peace.
- 6th Award <u>Economics was started in 1968</u> consists of a diploma and prize money.
- Nominated by a committee comprising of univ professors, scientists, previous winners etc they cannot nominate themselves.
- NP in Medicine Kaelin, Ratcliffe, Semenza : ==how cells sense and adapt to oxygen availability== - it plays a role in the immune system and earliest stages of dev inside the womb, can cure diseases like anaemia.
- Peebles, Mayor, Queloz won NP in Physics : for ==understanding of our place in the Universe== - relation b/w radiation emitted and matter created.
	 - Mayor and Queloz got for discovery of exoplanet outside our solar sys know as **51 Pegasus B**.
- Chemistry : Goodenough, Whittingham, Yoshino development of ==lithium-ion batteries==.
	- ==Li has the greatest electrochemical potential==, provides largest energy density for weight, safe, low maintenance, high cell voltage.
	- **Limitations** : requires protection circuit for safety, aging and capacity deterioration after 8 year, expensive to manufacture.
- Literature : Polish author Olga Tokarczuk and Austrian novelist Peter Handke will get 2018 and 2019 prize.
- Peace Prize : Abiy Ahmed Ali (PM of Ethiopia) "for his efforts to achieve peace and international cooperation" w/ neighbours Eriteria.
- Sveriges Riksbank prize in Economics to Banerjee, Duflo, Kremer "for their experimental approach to alleviating global poverty". Duflo has become the second woman to win prize after Elinor Ostrom (2009) of US.

### Nobel 2020
2021-07-04 11:58

- Nobel in Medicine for **Hepatitis C** : helped ==eliminate post transfusion hepatitis==, Hep C causes acute and chronic, cause liver cancer, bloodborne, NO effective vaccine. A to E are types.
- Nobel in Chemistry for CRISPR/ CAS 9 - Adv : Simple, works on all life forms, efficient, [[Static - Agriculture|agriculture]]. 
- UN World Food Program : Nobel Peace Prize, World Hunger Map is being prepared by Alibaba group.

### Noble 2021

- **Nobel Prize in Medicine** for dicoveries of receptors for temperature and touch. Can be used to develop treatments for a wide range of disease and conditions,
- **Chemistry** for development of assymetric organocatalysis. Are derived from naturally occuring chemicals, greener and cheaper, do not need purification to yield desired compound.

## S&T Dev and Their Applications and Effects in Everyday Life Achievement of Indians in ST

2020-10-22 07:49:00

---

- [ ] #todo 


## Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) #scheme

2020-01-08 10:55:03

---

- Flagship initiative of **NITI Aayog** promote innovation and entrepreneurship in the country. six major initiatives
    - Atal Tinkering Labs (ATL)
        - to cultivate 1 mil children as innovators, focus on innovation, economic aid given
        - ATL marathon to choose entrep and train them in specific sector
        - Gives one time financial support to educational insitutions
    - Atal Incubation Centers
    - Atal New India Challenges
    - ==Mentor India Campaign==
    - Atal Community Innovation Center - Program for underserved and unserved areas, PPP mode aid upto 5cr
    - ==ARISE== : innovation and research in the MSME industry
- **Gandhian Challenge by AIM** for children to ideate innovative solutions for sustainable IN of their dreams.
- Community Innovator Fellowship launched with UNDP as partner would give fellowship to girls for SDG based solutions in their pre incubation phase.


# Achievement of Indians in Science and Technology

2021-07-23 11:29

---
- [ ] #todo






# Indigenization of Technology and Developing New Tech

2020-10-22 07:49:42

---
- [ ] #todo







## Mo Electronics and IT #scheme

2020-06-11 19:22:11

---

- Stree Swabhiman initiative for promoting women's menstrual health and hygiene.
- **Jeevan Pramaan** : scheme under Meity is an AADHAR Biometric Authentication scheme based digital life certificates for Pensioners

### Common Service Centres (CSC)

- will provide access to affordable eco-friendly sanitary napkins. Sanitary Napkin manufacturing units will be set up at CSC operated by women entrepreneurs.

### National Supercomputing Mission

- connect academic and R&D institutions with the supercomputing grid by CDAC and DEITY
- Supercomputers would be installed across the country over the National Knowledge Network grid.
- NSM provides high performance computing HPC facilities access to Institutions.

### Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme M-SIPS by Mo

- **Electronics and IT** aims to promote large scale manufacturing in Electronics System Design and Manufacturing (ESDM) sector.
- It is a move towards 'Net Zero imports' goal of the gov in electronics.
- Will provide subsidy for capital expenditure upto 20% for investment in SEZ and 25% in non SEZs and providing reimbursement of duties and central taxes.
- Incentives will be available for 5 yrs.

### Digital India

- for a digitially empowered society and knowledge economy is monitored by committee comprising of several members.
- has 3 components : Digital infrastructure, Delivering services digitally and digital literacy.
- It has 9 key points: comprsing of Universal access to phones, Broadband Highways, Public internet access, e-governance, e-kranti, information for all etc.
- Common Services Centers CSC to act as access points for delivery of Government to Citizens and host of B2C services in rural and remote areas.

### Cyber Shikshaa Initiative

- focus on skilling women engineering graduates in field of Cyber Security.

It was launched by **Microsoft** and **Data Security Council of India DSCI**.

- For underserved women from Tier 2/ Tier 3 cities
- C-DAC will impart training.
- 4 month interactive training course.

### PM Gramin Digital Saksharta Abhiyan PMGDISHA

- aim to make 6 crore person in rural areas digitally literate.
- nominated digitally illiterate from eligible rural household aged 14-60yrs
- under the Digital India Program

### India BPO Promotion Scheme

- aims at setting up business process outsourcing (BPO) units in rural areas.
- under the **Digital India** Programme
- capital support along with special incentives up to Rs 1 lakh in the form of viability gap funding (VGF)
- Main objective is employment generation
- special incentives for employment to women and Divyang
- Special provisions for Himalayan States
- Metro cities are excluded.

### North East BPO Promotion Scheme NEBPS

- establishment of **5,000** seats in respect of BPOs in NER
- provides up to 50% of expenditure incurred on BPO/ITES operations towards capital expenditure upto 1 lakh/seat.
- Rs.1 Lakh/Seat for training expenditure and providing employment to Women and Persons with disability
- 5% of eligible financial support for units set up by local entrepreneurs.
- Software Technology Parks of India (STPI) is the implementing agency

### Digi Locker

- secure dedicated personal electronic space for storing the documents of resident Indian citizens
- provide citizens a shareable private space on a public cloud
- for storing personal documents like University Certificates, PAN cards, Voter ID etc
- Also an associated facitlity of **e-signing** the documents.

### Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme

- objective is to enhance the number of PhDs in Electronics System Design & Manufacturing (ESDM) and IT/ITES
- will give more fellowship amount than most of the other PhD Schemes
- Part-time PhD candidates get onetime incentive on completion
- Supports **200**Young Faculty Research Fellowships

## Mo Science and Tech

2020-06-12 13:37:22

---

### Vigyan Gram Sankul Pariyojana

- implement appropriate S&T interventions for sustainable development through
cluster approach in dev of rural areas in country
- by utilising local resources and locally available skill
- emphasis on agriculture related industries

### Interdisciplinary Cyber-Physical Systems Mission

- aims at establishment of Innovation hubs and research parks.
- It is a pan India mission

### KISAN (Krishi Innovation Science Application Network)

- focuses on empowering Smalland Women-Farmers with Science Implementation, it provides fellowship for training education etc.

### Cattle Genomics

- scheme aimed at selective breeding of the native livestock to improve resistance and yield.
- Implemented by National Institute of Animal Biotechnology.

### National Biopharma Mission

- accelerating biopharmaceutical development create globally competitive industry.
- Target to increase India's share from 2.8% to 5%.
- implemented by Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) - NPO set up by Do Biotech
- Co funded by WB, Innovate in India Program launched under this

### Various Schemes Related to Brain Drain Reversal

- **Ramanujan** Fellowship of the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB)
- Ramalingaswami Re-entry Fellowship of the Department of Biotechnology (DBT)
- INSPIRE Faculty Fellowship of the Department of Science and Technology (DST) for young researchers
- Nakshe portal contains all Topographic maps made by Survey of India

## Mo Earth Science #scheme

2020-06-11 19:21:34

---
- **ACROSS Scheme** : *Atmosphere & Climate Research-Modelling Observing Systems & Services* to provide a reliable weather and climate forecast including cyclones, storm surges, heat waves etc.
	- Also provide impetus to scientific and technical talents available in the country.
	- It has 9 sub schemes under it Including Doppler Weather Radars DWRs, Monsoon Mission III, Monsoon Convection, Clouds and Climate Change MC4, High Performance Computing System HPCS.
- **Sagar Vani** : information dissemination system serves the **fishermen** community,gives out alerts and advisories to them through television and cable networks. Info is given out by INCOIS.
- **Gramin Krishi Mausam Seva** in collab with ICAR issues crop and location specific weather based agro advisories.
- Agro-meteorological Advisory Services (AAS) prepares the biweekly weather based bulletins.
- INCOIS : gives best possible ocean info and advisory to society, industry, govt agencies.
	- Swell Surge forecast system was launched by it.

### O-SMART

- stands for **Ocean Services, Technology, Observations, Resources Modelling and Science** from 2017-2020
- Aimed at stepping up ocean research and setting up early warning weather systems
- Setting up observatories, Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion Plant OTEC

# PYQ : Science and Tech

2020-10-30 16:56:02

---

|     Why is there so   much activity in the field of biotechnology in our country? How has this   activity benefitted the field of biopharma?                                                                                                                                                                                                           |     2018    |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|
|     Stem cell therapy   is gaining popularity in India to treat a wide variety of medical conditions   including Leukaemia, Thalassemia, damaged cornea and several burns. Describe   briefly what stem cell therapy is and what advantages it has over other   treatments?                                                                            |     2017    |
|     India’s   Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) which has a database containing   formatted information on more than 2 million medicinal formulations is   proving a powerful weapon in the country’s fight against erroneous patents.   Discuss the pros and cons making this database publicly available under   open-source licensing    |     2015    |
|     What are the areas   of prohibitive labour that can be sustainably managed by robots? Discuss the   initiatives that can propel research in premier research institutes for      substantive and   gainful innovation.                                                                                                                             |     2015    |
|     In a globalised   world, intellectual property rights assume significance and are a source of   litigation. Broadly distinguish between the terms–copyrights, patents and   trade secrets.                                                                                                                                                       |     2014    |
|     What do you   understand by Umpire decision review in cricket? Discuss its various   components. Explain how silicon tape on the edge of a bat may fool the   system?                                                                                                                                                                              |     2013    |
|     What is an FRP   composite material? How are they manufactured? Discuss their applications in   aviation and automobile industry                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |     2013    |
|     Bring out the   circumstances in 2005 which forced amendment to section 3(d) in the India n   Patent Law, 1970. Discuss how it has been utilized by Supreme court in its   judgment rejecting Novartis patent application for “Glivec”. Discuss briefly   the pros and cons of the decision.                                                       |     2013    |
|     How does the 3D   printing technology work? List out the advantages and disadvantages of the   technology.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |     2013    |
|     What do you   understand by fixed dose drug combinations (FDCs)? Discuss their merits and   demerits.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |     2013    |

**Answers and Analysis**

1. Each year a large amount of plant material, cellulose, is deposited on the surface of Planet
Earth. What are the natural processes this cellulose undergoes before yielding carbon dioxide,
water and other end products? (पृथ्ी की सतह पर प्नत वष्भ बडी मात्रा में वनस्पनत पदाथि्भ, सेलुलोस, जमा हो जाता है । यह सेलुलोस
हकन प्ाकृ नतक प्हरियाओ से गुजरता है ज ं जससे हक वह काब्भन डाइऑसिाइड, जल तथिा अन् अंत्य उत्ादो में पर ं रवर्तत हो जाता है?) 2022

```ad-Answer

```

1. Launched on 25th December, 2021, James Webb Space Telescope has been much in the news
since then. What are its unique features which make it superior to its predecessor Space
Telescopes? What are the key goals of this mission? What potential benefits does it hold for
the human race? (25 हदसम्र, 2021 को छोडा गया जेम्स वेब अंतररक् िेलीस्ोप तभी से समाचारो में बना ं हआ है। ।उसमें ऐसी कौन-कौन
सी अनन् नविेषताएँ हैं जो उसे इससे पहले के अंतररक् िेलीस्ोपो से ं रिेष्ठ बनाती हैं? इस गमिन के मुख् ध्ेय क्ा हैं? मानव जानत के ललए इसके क्ा
सं भानवत लाभ हो सकते हैं?) 2022

```ad-Answer

```

1. What are the research in developmental achievements in applied biotechnology? How will
these achievements help to uplift the poor sections of the society? (अनुप्युति जैव-प्ौद्योगगकी में िोध और
नवकास सं बनी उपलत्धियाँ क्ा है ? ये उपलत्धियाँ समाज के ननध्भन वगमों के उत्ान में हकस प्कार सहायक होगी?) ं 2021

```ad-Answer

```

1. The Nobel Prize in Physics of 2014 was jointly awarded to a Akasaki, Amano and Nakamura
for the invention of Blue LEDs in1990s. How has this invention impacted the everyday life of
human beings? (वष्भ 2014 में भौनतक नवज्ान में नोबेल पुरस्ार सं युति रूप से आकसाकी, अमानो तथिा नाकामुरा को 1990 के दिक में नीली एल. ई. डी. के आनवष्कार के ललए प्दान हकया गया थिा। इस आनवष्कार ने मानव-जानत के दैनंहदन जीवन को हकस प्कार प्भानवत हकया है?) 2021

```ad-Answer

```

1. What do you understand by nanotechnology and how is it helping in health sector? (नैनोिेक्ोलाजी
से आप क्ा समझते हैं और यह स्ास्थ्य क्त्र में कै से म े द्द कर रहा है?) 2020

```ad-Answer

```

1. How is science interwoven deeply with our lives? What are the striking changes in agriculture
triggered off by the science-based technologies? (नवज्ान हमारे जीवन में गहराई तक कै से गुथिा हआ है? नवज्ान-आधाररत
प्ौद्योगगहकयो द् ं ारा कृ नष में उत्न्न हए महत्वपूण्भ पररवत्भन क्ा हैं?) 2020

```ad-Answer

```

1. COVID-19 pandemic has caused unprecedented devastation worldwide. However, technological
advancements are being availed readily to win over the crisis. Give an account of how technology
was sought to aid management to the pandemic. (कोनवड-19 महामारी ने नवश्भर में अभूतपूव्भ तबाही उत्न्न की है।
तथिानप, इस संकि पर नवजय पाने के ललए प्ौद्योगगकीय प्गनत का लाभ स्च्े ा से ललया जा रहा है। इस महामारी के प्बनन के सहायताथि्भ प्ौद्योगगकी की
खोज कै से की गई, उसका एक नववरण दीजजए।) 2020

```ad-Answer

```

1. Why is there so much activity in the field of biotechnology in our country? How has this activity
benefitted the field of biopharma? (क्ा कारण है हक हमारे देि में जैव प्ौद्योगगकी के क्ेत्र में अत्यसधक सहरियता है? इस सहरियता
ने बायोफामा्भ के क्त्र को कै से लाभ पह े ंचाया है?) 2018

```ad-Answer

```

1. Stem cell therapy is gaining popularity in India to treat a wide variety of medical conditions
including Leukaemia, Thalassemia, damaged cornea and several burns. Describe briefly what
stem cell therapy is and what advantages it has over other treatments? (लूकीगमया, थिैलासीगमया, क्नतग्रस्त
कॉर्नया व गंभीर दाह सहहत सुनवस्तृत चचहकत्ीय दिाओ में उपचार करने के ल ं लए भारत में ्टैम कोशिका चचहकत्ा लोकनप्य होती जा रही है । सं क्ेप में
वण्भन कीजजए हक ्टैम कोशिका उपचार क्ा होता है और अन् उपचारो की तुलना में उसके क् ं ा लाभ हैं ?) 2017

```ad-Answer

```

1. India’s Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) which has a database containing formatted
information on more than 2 million medicinal formulations is proving a powerful weapon in
the country's fight against erroneous patents. Discuss the pros and cons making this database
publicly available under open-source licensing. (भारत की पारंपररक ज्ान हडजजिल लाइब्रेरी (िी.के .डी.एल.) जजसमें 20
लाख से ज्यादा औषधीय फॉमूलेिनो पर सं रू ं नपत जानकारी है, त्रुहिपूण्भ पेिेंिो के ं प्नत देि की लडाई में एक िक्तििाली हसथियार सानबत हो रही है। मुति-
स्ोत लाइसेंससग के अधीन इस आंकड ं ा-सं चय (डेिाबेस) को साव्भजननक रूप से उपलधि कराने के पक् और नवपक् पर चचा्भ कीजजए।) 2015

```ad-Answer

```

1. What are the areas of prohibitive labour that can be sustainably managed by robots? Discuss
the initiatives that can propel research in premier research institutes for substantive and
gainful innovation. (ननषेधात्मक रिम के कौन-से क्त्र हैं, ज े जनका रोबोिो के द् ं ारा धारणीय रूप से प्बं धन हकया जा सकता है? ऐसी पहलो पर ं
चचा्भ कीजजए, जो प्मुख अनुसं धान सं स्ानो में मौल ं लक और लाभप्द नवाचार के ललए अनुसं धान को आगे बढ़ा सकें ।) 2015

```ad-Answer

```

1. In a globalised world, intellectual property rights assume significance and are a source of
litigation. Broadly distinguish between the terms–copyrights, patents and trade secrets. (वैश्ीकृ त
सं सार में, बौगधिक असधकारो का महत्व हो जाता है और वे मुक ं द्मेबाजी का एक स्ोत हो जाते हैं। कॉपीराइि, पेिेंि और व्यापार गुत्प्तयो के बीच मो ं िे तौर
पर नवभेदन कीजजए।) 2014

```ad-Answer

```

1. What do you understand by Umpire decision review in cricket? Discuss its various components.
Explain how silicon tape on the edge of a bat may fool the system? (हरिके ि में ‘खेल-पंच ननण्भय पुनरीक्ण
प्णाली’ से आप क्ा समझते है? उसके नवनवध अवयव की नववेचना कीजजए। ससललकॉन िेप में बल्े का हकनारा हकस प्कार भम पैदा कर सकता है?
समझाइए?) 2013

```ad-Answer

```

1. What is an FRP composite material? How are they manufactured? Discuss their applications
in aviation and automobile industry. (FRP गमशरित पदाथि्भ क्ा होता है? उनका उत्ादन कै से होता है? नवमानन और कार उद्योग में
उनके उपयोग की नववेचना कीजजए।) 2013

```ad-Answer

```

1. Bring out the circumstances in 2005 which forced amendment to section 3(d) in the Indian
Patent Law, 1970. Discuss how it has been utilized by Supreme court in its judgment rejecting
Novartis patent application for "Glivec". Discuss briefly the pros and cons of the decision. (भारतीय
एकस् असधकार ननयम (Patent Law) 1970 की धारा 3 (क) में वष्भ 2005 ने बलात् सं िोधन कराने वाली पररस्स्नतयो को स्प ं टि करते हए यह नववेचना कीजजए हक इसके कारण सववोच्च न्ायालय ने नावराहिस की ग्ाइवेक (Glivec) के एकस् असधकार आवेदन को हकस प्कार अस्ीकार हकया। ) 2013

```ad-Answer

```

1. How does the 3D printing technology work? List out the advantages and disadvantages of the
technology. (3-आयामी (3D) मुद्रण तकनीक हकस प्कार काय्भ करती है? इस तकनीक की लाभ-हाननयाँ सुचीबधि कीजजए।) 2013

```ad-Answer

```

1. What do you understand by fixed dose drug combinations (FDCs)? Discuss their merits and
demerits. (‘ननजचित मात्र औषध सं योगो’ ( ं FDCs) से आप क्ा समझते हैं? उनके गुण-दोषों नववेचना कीजजए।) 2013

```ad-Answer

```
