---
banner: "https://th-i.thgim.com/public/sci-tech/science/article19090300.ece/alternates/BASE_LANDSCAPE/17THaryan%20migrationrevised-1"
banner_y: 0.6775
---
# Expansions of Aryans in India
2020-04-20 00:09:33
            
---

- Indo-Aryan migration took place from 1800-1500 BCE. They were a branch of Indo-Iranians who originated from present day Afghanistan.
- Migration took several centuries and unlike Mortimer Wheelers hypothesis did not involve invasion.
- They occupied much of Northern India and expanded to other parts. 
- Were a linguistic group of people who spoke Indo European language. Ex Sanskrit words Matri and Pitri are similar to Mater and Pater of Latin. 
- Originally from Steppes. 
- Evidences from Hindu Kush region are horses, spoked wheels, fire cult and creamation which formed imp parts of Aryan life in India. 
-   Gandhara Grave culture :
    - 1710 BC and 200 BC.
    - oblong pits, stone lined walls usually closed with a stone slab
    - had larger upper pit filled with soil and charcoals
    - 3 types of burials : flexed, post cremation and fractional
    - Grave goods included goblets, pedestal cups, beakers. female figurines, bronze horse etc.
-   associated with ==Indo-Aryan migration== into the subcontinent and is seen as a token of it. It also has regional specificities related to it.
-   **Bogaz Koi** inscription b/w a Hittite and a Mitani king mentions Indra, Mitras, Nastasia, Ashvins and Varuna.
-   Dasa and Dasyus -> original inhabitant of the country were different
  - Aryans used Horse driven chariots, chain mail, had better arms.
















5. Discuss the geographical area known to the Rig Vedic people. Were they familiar with the sea? [1985, 60m]
-   https://www.gktoday.in/gk/the-geography-in-vedic-texts/
-   Mention about rivers, mountains, seas, deserts, cities and towns

