# The Beginning of Revolutionary Extremism in India

2020-04-27 15:16:57

```toc
```

---

- Proponents of the Military school of thought were Lal Bal Pal as well as Raj Narain Bose, Ashwini Kumar Datta, Aurobindo Ghosh, Vishnu Shastri Chiplunkar.
	- Chiplunkar wrote Kavyetihas Sangraha with objective of better familiarisation of poetry and history of Maharashtra.
- Ramosi Peasant Force was organised by Vasudev Balwant Phadke in 1879, which aimed to rid the country of the British by instigating an armed revolt.
- Tilak propagated militant nationalism through Ganapati and Shivaji festivals and through his journals Kesari and Maharatta .
- Chapekar brothers killed the Plague commissioner in Poona in 1897.
- Savarkar organised Mitra Mela as a secret society in 1899 it merged with Abhinav Bharat in 1904.
- Nasik, Poona and Bombay emerged as centres of bomb manufature.
- In Punjab Lala Lajpat Rai who brought out Punjabee and Ajit Singh (Bhagat Singh’s uncle) who organised the extremist Anjuman-i-Mohisban-i-Watan in Lahore with its journal, Bharat Mata.
- Shyamjii Krishnavarma founded the Indian Home Rule Society -  'India House' in 1905 as a schoarship scheme to bring out radical youth from India he also started a journal The Indian Sociologist.
- Bhikaji Cama brought out Bande Mataram journal.
- Prior to Ghadr, revolutionaries had set up Swadesh Sevak Home at Vancouver and United India House at Seattle.
- political mendicancy of the moderates and the failure of the extremists to give a positive lead to the people.
- Assassination of unpopular British officials and use their trial as method to spread their revolutionary idea .
- dacoities to raise funds for arms and ammunitions.
- extremists also failed to give a positive energy to the young revolutionary minds, they also did not opposed them politically or ideologically.
- Rev. lacked a mass base and severe repression from the colonial state led to their demise.

  > **Sumit Sarkar** - shift from non-violence to violence, mass action to elite action, necessitated by failure of mass mob efforts

- West - Ramosi peasant force, Chapekar brothers, youth clubs,
- East - Akhadas/ gyms,
- Real Beginning - Bengal 1902 Midnapur Society, Gym by Sarala Ghosal, Atomonnoti Samiti, Ansushilan Samiti by Satishchandra Basu, Dacca Anushilan Samiti 1906 - Pulin Behari Ghosh, Yugantar, Calcutta Anushilan Sam
- Rangpur robbery, assassination of spies, officials, K Bose + Chaki Kingsford
- After manikatal bomb conspiracy trial, rev activity went underground
- 1911 Rev act moved to Pun + UP
- 1912 - ass attempt Hardinge
- 1914 Komagata Maru

All questions of Revolutionary Extremist is compiled at one place in chapter 11
