# Politics of Association

2020-04-27 15:13:51

```toc
```

---

- Raja Rammohan Roy was the pioneer of political movt in IN demanded liberty of press, appt of IN in civil courts and other higher posts, codification of lwas. Some of his provisions were added in Charter Act of 1833.

## Pre-Congress Association

- The **Bangabhasha Prakasika Sabha** was formed in 1836 by associates of RRR to discuss topics of policy and administration and their redressal through petitions and memorials.
- **Zamindari Association 1938** : more popularly known as the ‘Landholders’ Society marked the beginning of organised political acitivity.
- **The Bengal British India Society** : founded in 1843 with objecives of “collection and dissemination of information relating to the actual condition of the people".
- **1851** both the Landholders’ Society and the Bengal British India Society merged into **the British Indian Association** .
	- Demanded for ==separate legislature of a popular character, separate executive and judiciary functions, reduction of salaries of higher officers, abolition of salt and stamp duties.==
- **East India Association** : organised by Dadabhai Naoroji in 1866 in London to influence public there and promote Indian welfare
- **The Indian League** : was started in 1875 by Sisir Kumar Ghosh with the object of stimulating the sense of nationalism.
- Indian League was superseded by the **Indian Association of Calcutta** aka **Indian National Association** in 1876  to unify Indian people and create strong public opinion. It merged with the INC in 1886 by ==Anand Mohan Bose and Suredranath Banerjee==. Kept annual subscription at Rs 5.
- **The Poona Sarvajanik Sabha** : founded in <u>1867</u> by Mahadeo Govind Ranade as a bridge b/w gov and people.
- **Bombay Presidency Association** was started by Badruddin Tyabji , Pherozshah Mehta and K.T. Telang in 1885.
- **Madras Native Association** in 1852 by Gazulu Lakshminarasu Chetty was extention of British India Asso.
- **The Madras Mahajan Sabha** was founded in 1884 by M. Viraraghavachari, B.Subramaniya Aiyer and P. Anandacharlu.
- **National Indian Association** in 1867 by Mary Carpenter
- **United Indian Committee** in 1883 by Womesh Chandra Banerjee
- **Bombay Association** founded on the line of British India Asso by Jagannath Shankar Seth in 1852 to remind govt authroities the removal of existing evils and prevent inactments that could be injurious to general interest of all in the country.

## Indian National Conference

- prelude to the Congress
- its sessions had been held in 1883 and 1885, which had representatives drawn from all major towns of India
- ==Surendranath Banerjea and Ananda Mohan Bose were its main architects==
- A.O. Hume, mobilised the leading intellectuals and organised the in Bombay in December 1885
- presided by Womesh Chandra Bannerjee.
- 1890 Kadambini Ganguly became the first woman to graduate out of Calcutta University and to address a Congress session.

## Home Rule League

- Annie Besant set up her Home Rule league in September 1916 in **Madras** and covered the rest of India (including Bombay )
- Tilak set up his Home Rule League in April 1916  and was **restricted to Maharashtra** (excluding Bombay city), Karnataka, Central Provinces and Berar
	- **George Arundale** was its organising secretary
- Congress had leapt into inactivity after the split and Annie Besant was working to arouse nationalist activity and persuade the moderates to re-take the extremists.
- Tilak demanded for education in vernacular and reorganisation of states on a linguistic basis along with Swaraj.
- did this through extensive tours, distributing pamphlets etc.
- Besant's aides during this time were ==Arundale, Ramaswamy Aiyer and BP Wadia==.
- demanded Home Rule and stirred agitation through promoting political education and discussion, libraries, printing pamphlets etc.
- Moderate Congressmen dissatisfied by the actions of Congress during this time were urged to join the ranks and take lecture tours.
- movement faded after 1918 because the moderates were pacified by the promise of reforms and Besant's release from Jail.
- Besant after release frequently vacillated whether to accept the reforms or to oppose them
- Tilak left for England during this time.
- major achievement was that it created a generation of ardent nationalists who formed backbone of later national movt.

## PYQs

---

**Factors leading to the birth of Indian Nationalism**

1. Describe the nature of Indian Nationalism with special reference to the character of its
leadership in the period between 1885 and 1905. [1982, 60m]
- [Partha Chatterjee - nationalism in IN was diff but a](onenote: [[Factors]] %20Leading%20to%20the%20Birth%20of%20Indian%20Nationalism&section-id={B581C32F-FD0C-4B89-9FC2-A41D98F19005}&page-id={1DAFFDD6-9920-47E7-8DD2-63E81E99B2DB}&object-id={7F6960EC-6B6A-4728-9CCE-09D2BAAEAB03}&C&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20II/Indian%20Nationalism-factors__.one> )
- [First 20 yrs moderate politics, anglicised upper class, little time](onenote: [[The]] %20Moderates%20and%20Extremists&section-id={B581C32F-FD0C-4B89-9FC2-A41D98F19005}&page-id={98652DF5-C022-4FE2-AC93-FDDC14711F66}&object-id={D11A2C1E-EBB4-4B1C-9728-EF49C3534308}&12&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20II/Indian%20Nationalism-factors__.one> )

1. "The Ilbert Bill was the most extreme but by no means isolated expression of white
racism." Comment. [1987, 20m]
- Refer SB
- [Gov regulation viz Lex loci act, Income tax 1860, Councils](onenote: [[Factors]] %20Leading%20to%20the%20Birth%20of%20Indian%20Nationalism&section-id={B581C32F-FD0C-4B89-9FC2-A41D98F19005}&page-id={1DAFFDD6-9920-47E7-8DD2-63E81E99B2DB}&object-id={6D7315C5-C1DA-4BBB-8DDA-B91CB383EB33}&4A&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20II/Indian%20Nationalism-factors__.one> )
- [Ilbert Bill controversy :](onenote: [[Factors]] %20Leading%20to%20the%20Birth%20of%20Indian%20Nationalism&section-id={B581C32F-FD0C-4B89-9FC2-A41D98F19005}&page-id={1DAFFDD6-9920-47E7-8DD2-63E81E99B2DB}&object-id={AEE6C2B7-875D-464A-8B9D-45CA3656B3CF}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20II/Indian%20Nationalism-factors__.one> )

1. "The national democratic awakening of the Indian people found expression of white
racism." Comment. [1987, 20m]
- [Gov regulation viz Lex loci act, Income tax 1860, Councils](onenote: [[Factors]] %20Leading%20to%20the%20Birth%20of%20Indian%20Nationalism&section-id={B581C32F-FD0C-4B89-9FC2-A41D98F19005}&page-id={1DAFFDD6-9920-47E7-8DD2-63E81E99B2DB}&object-id={6D7315C5-C1DA-4BBB-8DDA-B91CB383EB33}&4A&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20II/Indian%20Nationalism-factors__.one> )
- Racism after 1857 , refer SB

1. "The new India was not to be built up, as late nineteenth century patriots had thought, by copious draught from the past, but rather by frequent injections from the energetic
contemporary west." Comment. [1990, 20m]
- [Ilbert Bill controversy :](onenote: [[Factors]] %20Leading%20to%20the%20Birth%20of%20Indian%20Nationalism&section-id={B581C32F-FD0C-4B89-9FC2-A41D98F19005}&page-id={1DAFFDD6-9920-47E7-8DD2-63E81E99B2DB}&object-id={AEE6C2B7-875D-464A-8B9D-45CA3656B3CF}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20II/Indian%20Nationalism-factors__.one> )

1. "It was in this almost unrecognizable form that the Ilbert Bill was finally enacted…. it was
primarily a failure of the Viceroy." Comment. [1992, 20m]
- [Ilbert Bill controversy :](onenote: [[Factors]] %20Leading%20to%20the%20Birth%20of%20Indian%20Nationalism&section-id={B581C32F-FD0C-4B89-9FC2-A41D98F19005}&page-id={1DAFFDD6-9920-47E7-8DD2-63E81E99B2DB}&object-id={AEE6C2B7-875D-464A-8B9D-45CA3656B3CF}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20II/Indian%20Nationalism-factors__.one> )

1. Examine the economic and social factors which led to the rise of Indian nationalism in the second half of the nineteenth century. [2001, 60m]
- [Partha Chatterjee disagrees - IN society was imagining its nation](onenote: [[Factors]] %20Leading%20to%20the%20Birth%20of%20Indian%20Nationalism&section-id={B581C32F-FD0C-4B89-9FC2-A41D98F19005}&page-id={1DAFFDD6-9920-47E7-8DD2-63E81E99B2DB}&object-id={6D7315C5-C1DA-4BBB-8DDA-B91CB383EB33}&17&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20II/Indian%20Nationalism-factors__.one> )

1. "Rabindranath Tagore's nationalism was based on a Catholic internationalism."
Comment. [2003, 20m]
- [Tagore's Nationalism :](onenote: [[Factors]] %20Leading%20to%20the%20Birth%20of%20Indian%20Nationalism&section-id={B581C32F-FD0C-4B89-9FC2-A41D98F19005}&page-id={1DAFFDD6-9920-47E7-8DD2-63E81E99B2DB}&object-id={04040E5F-4F81-438B-AAC1-2B94497857E9}&B&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20II/Indian%20Nationalism-factors__.one> )
