# Foundation of Indian National Congress

2020-04-27 15:14 :00

```toc
```

---

- INC founded in 1885 by 72 political workers was the first organised expression of Indian Nationalism on an all India scale. AO Hume played an imp role in its foundation.
- First session of the Indian National Congress at **Gokuldas Tejpal Sanskrit College.**
- Presided by WC Bonnerji.
- Tried to eliminate regional diff.
- Dev consolidation of sentiments of national unity.

## The Nationalist Demands of the time Were (Not Necessarily INC demands)

- No reduction of import duties on textile import.
- No expansion in Burma and Afghanistan.
- Right to bear arms.
- High expenditure on famine relief.
- Reduction of military expenditure.
- Right of Indian to join semi military volunteer corps.
- Right of Indian judges to try Europeans in criminal cases.
- Appeal to British voters to vote for a party which would listen to Indians.

## Other Pre INC Political Agitations

- Indianisation of the Govt
- Against Vernacular Press Act
- Against Plantation Labour and Inland Emigration Act 1881-82
- In favour of Ilbert Bill 1883

## Problems with other Political Associations pre INC

- British Indian Association of Bengal had increasingly identified itself with the **interests of the zamindars** and, thus, gradually lost its anti-British edge
- The Bombay Association and Madras Native Association had become **reactionary and moribund**.

## Other Associations

- M. Viraraghavachariar, G. Subramaniya Iyer, P. Ananda Charlu and others --- formed the Madras Mahajan Sabha in 1884.
- In Bombay, the more militant intellectuals like K.T. Telang and Pherozeshah Mehta broke away from older leaders like Dadabhai Framji and Dinshaw Petit on political grounds and formed the **Bombay Presidency Association in 1885**.
- All these agitations and association had failed because a concerted all India effort was missing whereas the Europeans were together in all their political agitations.
- **Dadabhai Naoroji** (1904), **Gopal Krishna Gokhale**(1905) and **Lokmanya Tilak** (1906) demanded self-government on the lines of the self-governing colonies of Canada and Australia.
