# Safety Valve Thesis Relating to the Birth of Congress

2020-04-27 15:14:17

```toc
```

---

## The Thesis

- myth is that the Indian National Congress was started by A.O. Hume and others under the official direction, guidance of Lord Dufferin to provide a **safe, mild, peaceful, and constitutional outlet or safety valve** for the rising discontent among the masses.
- Core was that violent revolution was on the cards and could be avoided only by the Congress.
- **Lala Lajpat Rai** used it to attack the Moderates within the Congress through its Young India book that he published in 1916.
- **R Palme Dutt's** work India Today wrote that it was secretly organised with through a plan by the Viceroy. A/c to him Congress lead the masses in the national struggle but betrayed them when they moved towards a revolutionary path.
- RSS chief **Golwalkar** has criticised using this that INC has stifled true nationalism.
- Liberals CF Andrews and Girija Mukherji accepted the this theory because it helped avoid useless bloodshed.
- was 1st mentioned in William Wedderburn's biography of AO Hume in 1913 who sourced it from undated memorandum in Hume's paper dealing with the foundation of INC.
- memorandum slowly became government reports, secret report from the CID, he received in his official capacity but the reports were nowhere to be found in the National Archives.

## Clues against These Assumptions

- Hume worked in Do Revenue, Agriculture and Commerce. How could he get Home Dept files or CID reports.
- was in Shimla and the files were kept in Delhi.
- Some have said that 30,000 reporters had said that there was discontent among the peasants. But state employed only more than a few hundred.
- meeting was held in 1878 b/w Hume and Dufferin. Why did they wait for 7 years to found INC.
- Wedderburn writes that Hume got that the warning was received from various religious leaders who got this information from their Chelas.
- The impression given by him was that these Gurus had supernatural occult powers.
- Dufferin was critical of Hume and his organisation of a Political party on the line of Irish one to bring the opinions of the Natives to the fray.

## PYQs

---

**The Safety-valve thesis relating to the birth of the Congress;**

1. Discuss 'the safety valve' theory. Does it satisfactorily explain the foundation of the Indian National Congress? [1991, 60m]
2. To what extent was the emergence of the Congress in 1885 the culmination of a process of political awakening that had its beginning in the 1870s? [2000, 60m]
3. "The 'safety-valve thesis' does not adequately explain the birth of the Indian National
Congress in 1885." Critically examine. [2014, 10m]
