# Programmes and Objective of Early Congress

2020-04-27 15:14 :43

```toc
```

---

## Objective of Early Nationalists

 - Basic objectives of the early nationalist leaders were to lay the foundations of a secular and democratic national movement,
 - to politicize and politically educate the people,
 - to form the headquarters of the movement, that is, to form an all-India leadership group,
 - and to develop and propagate an anti-colonial nationalist ideology.

### Certain Drawbacks of Early Nationalists

- Failed to understand the character of the colonial state
- Did not carry out anti-imperialist mass struggles.

## Objectives of Early Congress

- The promotion of national unity was a major objective of the Congress.
	- If an overwhelming majority of Hindu or Muslims objected no resolution was to be passed - 1888
	- wherever Parsis, Christians, Muslims or Hindus were a minority their number in elected council cannot be less than the proportion in population - 1889
- The second major objective of the early Congress was to create a common political platform around which people could gather and conduct their political activities.
	- This is why Congress was not to take up social reform.
	- All initial activity of the early nationalism was geared towards the consolidation of public opinion.
	- The primary objective was to go beyond the redressal of immediate grievances and organize sustained political activity along the lines of the Anti-Corn Law League.
	- create a common all-India national-political leadership
- WC Bonnerji reiterated that one of the Congress objective was the eradication of race, creed or provincial prejudices amongst all lovers of our country and promotion of intimacy and friendship.
- **internalization and indigenization of political democracy** based on the doctrine of the sovereignty of people.
- It was organised in the form of a Parliament and rooted **parliamentary democrac**y in India.
- made **maintenance of civil liberties and their extension** an integral part of the national movement.

## PYQs

---

Programme and objectives of Early Congress; the social composition of
early Congress leadership; the Moderates and Extremists

1. Describe briefly the ideals and programme of the Indian National Congress between 1885 and 1905 and assess official response to it. [1980, 60m]
2. Trace the factors which led to a split in the Indian national Congress in 1907. What was its impact on the course of the nationalist movement? [2003, 60m]
3. Analyze the social composition of the early Congress leadership. [2009, 30m]
4. "Politics remained for the bulk of the Moderates very much a part-time affair. The
Congress was not a political party, but an annual three-day show…" Elucidate. [2014, 20m]

5. "At the dawn of the twentieth century Lord Curzon, the viceroy of India, was full of hostility towards the Indian National Congress and he confidentially reported to the secretary of state in November 1900: My own belief is that the congress is tottering to its fall, and one of my greatest ambitions while in India is to assist it to a peaceful demise." Examine. [2013, 25m]
6. Can method and politics of the moderates be referred to as 'political mendicancy? [2018,
10 Marks]
