# The Partition of Bengal 1905

2020-04-27 15:16:20

```toc
```

---

## Partition Plan

- Masterpiece of Internal policy to estd 2 provinces of Bengal proper and Eastern Bengal and Assam.
- He described it as mere readjustment of adm reforms.
- A/C to him Mymensingh and Backergange division were lawless and crime was prevalent.
- New Province of Eastern Bengal and Assam had HQ at Dacca with Muslims at majority to be under a Lt Governor.
- Western Bengal included Bihar and Orissa had 42mil Hindus and 9mil Mohammedans.

## Anti Partition Campaign 1903-1905 Was

- Administration of Bengal had become a unwieldy due to increase in population. But the real motive was political.
- Curzon's aim was to make Bengali's a linguistic minority and prop up Muslims against Hindus since Bengali Nationalims and solidarity was growing.
- Curzon said that his aim was to create a Mohammedan province where Islam could be predominant and in ascendancy.
- led by Surendranath Banerjea, K.K. Mitra and Prithwishchandra Ray
- through pamphlets and newspapers like Hitabadi, Sanjibani and Bengalee.
- Mulsims who participated in Anti-Partion movement of 1902-03 were ==Barrister Abdul Rasul, Liaqat Hussain, Maulana Azad. Upper and middle class Muslims stayed away==.
- **Subramnian Siva** and **Chidambram Pillai** led strikes in Tuticorin and Tiunelveli in 1903-05.
- The partition of Begal was annulled in 1911 mainly done to curb revolutionary terrorism.
- Was decided to shift capital to Delhi -> end of Bengali dominance in national politics. Bihar and Orissa were taken out of Bengal and Assam was made a separate province.


## PYQs

---

**The Partition of Bengal (1905); The Swadeshi Movement in Bengal; the**
**economic and political aspects of Swadeshi Movement;**

1. Write a critical note on: Significance of the Swadeshi Movement 1905-07 in the freedom
struggle. [1981, 20m]



2. "Curzon's political obtusely created a breach between government and people which
was never wholly closed in the remaining forty-two years of British rule." Comment. [1984,
20m]



3. "Curzon was an unconscious catalyst who did not understand, let alone desire, what the
new century was about to bring forth, but who helped it to be born." Comment. [1989, 20m]



4. "The tragedy of Cruzan lay in that, with such abundance of trained talent; he was denied
the crowning qualities. He was never an administrator of the first rank." Comment. [1991,
20m]



5. "Curzon's partition of Bengal gave the unwitting initiative to events of magnitude and
returned many years later to port with the cargo of freedom." Comment. [1997, 20m]



6. "India after 1905 had new interests and objectives and compelled new lines of policy."
Comment. [1996, 20m]




7. "The Anti-Partition Agitation (1905) had an economic character in Bengal unlike the
Extremist Agitation in Maharashtra which had a religious character." Examine. [2014, 20m]




8. Explain "Constructive Swadeshi" Characterised by atmashakti (self-reliance), which
propelled the Swadeshi Movement in Bengal. [2016, 10m]


