# Dayanand Saraswati

2020-04-27 15:08:51

```toc
```

---

## Dayanand Saraswati 1824-83

- born in Brahmin family in Gujarat, his father was a great vedic scholar who taught him vedic literature, logic, philosophy, ethics etc
- $ for the quest of truth he started yogabhyas and left home.
- wandered for 15 years as an ascetic in India to study yoga.
- formally org first **[[#Arya Samaj]] in 1875** in Bombay and its HQ were estd later at Lahore.
- extensively toured for propagating his ideas.
- $ wanted to unite IN religiously, socially and nationally.
- looked on Vedas as IN Rock of Ages and true seed of Hinduism.
- Motto was "**Go Back to Vedas**", gave his own interpretation of it and disregarded authority of Puranas.
- Condemned idol worship and superstitions.
- His works were published in **Satyarth Prakash**.
- @ Rejected popular Hindu **philosophy** which held physical world as an illusion and soul being part of god. He believed that God, Soul and Matter prakriti were distinct and eternal entities and every individual had to work out his own salvation.
- disregarded fate and destiny being predeterminants to human life.
- Accepted the doctrine of Karma.
- Challenged position of Brahmins as priestly class, did not accept them as being intermediaries b/w man and god.
- $ Condemned caste system based on birth but accepted 4 fold Varna division.
- Advocated equal status b/w man and woman, widow remarriage was accepted and child marriages condemned.

# Arya Samaj

- was outcome/expression of ==reaction to western influence and ideals== and was revivalist in form.
- Ten principles were approved by DS
	- ie God is primary source of all true knowledge.
	- God almighty is alone worthy of worship; Vedas are true books of knowledge.
	- AS should be ready to accept truth and abandon untruth.
	- All actions must conform to dharma ie right and wrong.
	- principle aim is worlds well being; everyone should be treated with love and justice.
	- Ignorance should be dispelled and knowledge inc
	- Upliftiment of others; social well being of mankind.
- estd DAV schools which was greatest achievement of AS ie spread of education.
- Gave self confidence and self reliance to Hindus and undermined the superiority of White race and western Culture.
- Succeeded in protecting Hindu society from onslaught of Islam and Christianity.
- Political leaders like Guru Dutt, Lala Hans Raj, Lala Lajpat Rai etc. DS political slogan was India for the Indians.
- ! Follower Guru Dutt + Lekh Ram militant campaign preaching religion of Vedas, attacking Muslims, initiate Shuddhi, cow protectionism

## Limitation of Arya Samaj

- [ ] #todo

Dayanada Saraswati

1. The Arya Samaj "did not; however, succeed in capturing the imagination of modern India as a whole." Comment. [1998, 20m]
- [Limitation of Arya Samaj](onenote: [[Dayanand]] %20Saraswati&section-id={A977D883-2588-4815-BADC-1D76D59D42AD}&page-id={968DEB75-A280-4AAC-BE43-D013C962C6D7}&object-id={66F1A841-AE23-476C-87E6-E6CE8AF1F940}&D&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Social%5eJ%20Religious%20Reform%20in%20Bengal.one> )

1. "The Arya Samaj may quite logically be pronounced as the outcomes of conditions imported into India by the west." Comment. [2009, 20m]
- [Expression as a response to western ideals](onenote: [[Dayanand]] %20Saraswati&section-id={A977D883-2588-4815-BADC-1D76D59D42AD}&page-id={968DEB75-A280-4AAC-BE43-D013C962C6D7}&object-id={0D43E31E-BDC4-4387-BAB5-4C840BB1ACBD}&B&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Social%5eJ%20Religious%20Reform%20in%20Bengal.one> )

1. "Swami Dayanand's philosophy represents both elements of extremism and social radicalism." Substantiate. [2015, 20m]
- [His philosophy](onenote: [[Dayanand]] %20Saraswati&section-id={A977D883-2588-4815-BADC-1D76D59D42AD}&page-id={968DEB75-A280-4AAC-BE43-D013C962C6D7}&object-id={08F60669-2257-4EEE-A417-4BF7D01C5049}&F&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Social%5eJ%20Religious%20Reform%20in%20Bengal.one> )

1. "The Arya Samaj may quite logically be pronounced as the outcome of conditions imported into India from the West." Critically examine. [2017, 10m]
- [Expression as a response to western ideals](onenote: [[Dayanand]] %20Saraswati&section-id={A977D883-2588-4815-BADC-1D76D59D42AD}&page-id={968DEB75-A280-4AAC-BE43-D013C962C6D7}&object-id={0D43E31E-BDC4-4387-BAB5-4C840BB1ACBD}&B&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Social%5eJ%20Religious%20Reform%20in%20Bengal.one> )
