# Sources from 200BC- 300AD
2020-04-29 19:01 :08

```toc
```
---

###  For the time immediately succeeding the overthrow of Mauryas, the sources are as under
 
| Source           | Writer    |
| ---------------- | --------- |
| Gargi Samhita    | ---       |
| Mahabhasya       | Patanjali |
| Divyadana        | ---       | 
| Malvikaagnimitra | Kalidasa  |
| Harshacharita    | Bana      |

Sources of History from 200BC to 300AD
-   **Puranas**  provide list of rulers and dynasties
-   evidence of Sunga history comes from their inscription from Ayodhya, Vidisha and Bharhut
-   sources for various **gana sanghas comes from coins**
-   Kharoshthi inscriptions, Buddhist sources viz Milinda Panha and Chinese historical sources can also be used
-   Arthashastra, Junagadh rock inscription, Buddhist works
-   Megasthene's Indica gives description about society, economy, administration of Mauryas. 

## Megasthenes' Indica

-   Extrapolation from Diodorus, Strabo, Pliny, Arrian, Claudius - secondary account
-   Wrote for Greek audience, mentions size, shape, rivers, soils, climate plants, produce, administration, society; lengthy description of animals
-   **Religion** : worship Herakles/ Krishna, not mentions Buddhists, similarity w/ Greek and Brahman ideas of world, Soul
-   M lived in Pataliiputra

###   Administration 

-   **King** : splendid life in palace, not slept in one room for more than 2 days, always available for consultation. Gives details about the personal life of Chandragupta Maurya. Was an autocrat and weilded unlimited powers. Had spies to keep him updated.
-   **Patliputra** : Mentions it bounded by deep ditch, wooden wall, Had 570 towers 64 gates. Called it Palibothra meaning city w/ gates. Was Capital.
- City was administered by 6 committees having 5 mem each and did functions such as sanitation, care of foreigners, registration of birth and death, regulation of weights and measures and other functions.
- Armed forced functions done by boards of 30 officers divided into 6 committees each having 6 mem each. 
	- 6 wings of CMs forces were army, cavalry, elephants, chariots, navy and transport. Each under a separate committee. 

###    Society 

-  live frugally, disciplined, no theft, no written laws, don't know writing, never drink wine
-   Cannot marry outside of Genos
-   Caste sys was hereditary occupation and endogamy
-   Slavery unknown : interpreted as being mild, only domestic slave who were treated as mem of family. This was a wrong assummptions, law books of the time viz smritis mention that slavery was a recognised institution during this time.

####    IN divided into 7 classes (CASO FPS)

-   Philosophers - no is inferior but high in dignity
-   Farmers - numerous, regarded as public benefactors, protected from injury
-   Shepherds and hunters - live in tents, pay taxes from their animals
-   Artisans and Traders - perform public duties, pay tax, make weapons
-   Soldiers - enjoy greatest freedom, devoted solely to mil activities
-   Overseers - supervise everything, report to king,
-   Councillors and assessors - who are engaged in public affairs, is the smallest class but most respected. They are advisors to the king, army generals chief magistrates, supervisors for agricultural works. 

### Critical Analysis of Megasthenes
-   Socially geographically restricted, 7 fold division did not correspond to varnas or Jatis
-   Idealised India - farmers never touched in war etc
-   Later interpolation does not make sense is untrue/ exaggerated
	-   Ex Diodorous - one horned horses, river on which nothing floats, strange customs, men w/ dog heads, gold digging ants





2. Critically examine the sources for the study of Mauryan dynasty. How are they useful in understanding the Mauryan administration? [1980, 60m]
-   [Sources of History from 200BC to 300AD](onenote:[[Sources]]%20from%20200BC-%20300AD&section-id={C0CC9BD8-A1E3-4D8E-BE38-44EB6ABF19EE}&page-id={DD539256-5E7A-48AA-A70A-8F7C0ECB064C}&object-id={C327A81E-64E1-443D-B8DD-9682B33B4393}&22&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Mauryan%20Empire.one)
 


7. Discuss critically the relative importance of the different source for the history of the Mauryan period. [1986, 60m]
-   [Sources of History from 200BC to 300AD](onenote: [[Sources]] %20from%20200BC-%20300AD&section-id={C0CC9BD8-A1E3-4D8E-BE38-44EB6ABF19EE}&page-id={DD539256-5E7A-48AA-A70A-8F7C0ECB064C}&object-id={C327A81E-64E1-443D-B8DD-9682B33B4393}&22&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Mauryan%20Empire.one )



14. Determine the veracity of Megasthenes' descriptions of Indian society and economy with the help of other contemporary evidences. [1994, 60m]
-   [Critical Examination of Megasthenes Indica and other sources](onenote:[[Sources]]%20from%20200BC-%20300AD&section-id={C0CC9BD8-A1E3-4D8E-BE38-44EB6ABF19EE}&page-id={DD539256-5E7A-48AA-A70A-8F7C0ECB064C}&object-id={CC3DE098-61B5-4C8A-A74C-6927489C364E}&B&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Mauryan%20Empire.one)



18. Examine sources of information for Mauryan dynasty. Throw light on historical significance of Ashoka's inscriptions. [1999, 60m]
-   [Sources from 200BC- 300AD](onenote: [[Sources]] %20from%20200BC-%20300AD&section-id={C0CC9BD8-A1E3-4D8E-BE38-44EB6ABF19EE}&page-id={DD539256-5E7A-48AA-A70A-8F7C0ECB064C}&end&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Mauryan%20Empire.one )