# Foundation of Mauryan Empire
2020-04-20 00:10 :09

```toc
```
---

## Foundation of the Mauryan empire 

-   Maurya empire built on foundations laid by the **Nandas**.
-   first 3 rulers were Chandragupta (324/321-297 BCE), Bindusara (297-273BCE), and Ashoka.

### Origin Theory of Mauryas

-   Some say Chandragupta was son of a low born from a woman called 'Mura' thus the name Maurya. This link with Nanda king is not followed by other classical sources.
-   **Buddhist** say that he was member of Moriya clan of Pipphalivana linking them to the  Sakyas.
-   **Puranas** called Mauryas as Shudras, also say that Chanakya had put Chandragupta on the throne. Puranas looked down upon Magadhans because they were Heterodoxical.

### Sources and details of Chandragupta Maurya rule

-   Buddhist texts such as the **Digha Nikaya, Mahavamsa, and Divyavadana** mentions them as Moriyas. 
-   Various other texts mentioning them :  **Parishishtaparvan, Mudrarakshasa** and medieval **writings of Kshemendra and Somadeva.**
-   Chandragupta may have first established himself in Punjab region and then moved eastwards. 
-   Conflict with Nandas has been mentioned in **Milindpanha Mudrarakshasa, Mahavamshatika, and Parishishtaparvan**. 
-   Inscription at **Junagadh of Rudraman** is the only definite inscriptional reference
-   writings of **Mamulanar in his poem Akananuru** refers to the larger army of Chandragupta
-   Later **inscriptions of Jainas** such as those at Shravana Belagola have the word Chandra as their suffix
-   Writings of foreign authors like **Plutarch and Justin** suggests Chandragupta to have over ran India and that he was the chief architect of the Mauryan Empire

> **D.D. Kosambi** argued that Alexanders Invasion "hastened the Mauryan conquest of the whole country."
-   Alexanders invasion caused a vacuum in North West, governors there either assasinated or retreated making it easy for Chandragupta.
-   Seleceus Nikator gave Chandragupta in lieu of 500 elephants eastern Afghanistan Baluchistan and the area west of the Indus. 
	-   Marriage alliance was also concluded. 
	-   He sent his ambassador Megasthenes.
	-   Megasthenes was the ambassador of **Seleuceus Nikator** in the court of Chandragupta Maurya and wrote the book [[7.1 Sources from 200BC-300AD#Megasthenes' Indica | Indica]].
	-   The book does not survice. Later writers that have quotes his writings are Pliny the elder, Strabo and Arrian. ? #issue 
-   Conquest and subjugation of Saurashtra/ Kathiawar mentioned in **Junagadh Rock inscription of Rudraman** 
	-   Pushyagupta the governor of Chandragupta constructed the Sudarshana lake.
-   Tamil writers of the Sangam text mention Moriyar

### Bindusara

-   Bindusara succeeded Chandragupta 
-   **Mahabhasya** refers to him as Amitraghata and Greek accounts as Amitrochates or Dionysius
-   Bindusara is called as Amitrochates by classical sources.
    -   In his reign that Mauryan control of the Deccan and Mysore was concluded
    -   followed Ajivika sect
- Magadha : triumph of monarchial form of political organisation over other forms such ex gana-sangha
- Deimachos was a greek ambassador at his court.

## Polity

-   Mauryas was centralized bureaucratic empire. Established through the military and other exploits of individuals
-   unified centralized - decision making is monopolized often replacing earlier traditional/local authorities
-   Geo political factors shape their activities
-   Administration was expected to work for exploitative purposes.
-   High degree of inequality in society
-   Idea of an emperor was expressed through the Sanskrit term **Chakravarti** and the his sphere of rule was a **Chakravartin Kshetr**a as mentioned in Arthashastra.
-   mentions the 7 limbs or angas which made a rashtra (FATAL EK prem katha). They are : ^8f5046
    -   King
    -   ministers (mantri)
    -   ally,(mitra)
    -   taxes (kara)
    -   army (sena)
    -   fort (durga)
    -   land or territory (desh)
    -   enemy (shatru)


## Causes of Success of Mauryan Empire 
- [x]   #todo 
- State formation in India had been slow. Mauryan hinterlands did not have agressive shiefs and princes looking to fight M imperialists. M infact indirectly initiated state formation in such areas.
- Iron from the chotanagpur areas helped create a greater agriculture surplus.
-  Large Standing army and Civil services
-  Administrative structure 
-  Alexanders Invasion hastened decline of Nandas caused a vacuum that was filled by CM
-  Religio-Cultural uniformity created by Ashoka. Per Romila Thapar this was to make administration of fringe areas easy and also to make people conform to the ideals of state.







22. Determine the extent of the Mauryan empire. [2005, 60m]
-   [Ashoka (268 - 232 BCE) :](onenote:[[Ashoka]],%20Concept%20of%20Dharma&section-id={C0CC9BD8-A1E3-4D8E-BE38-44EB6ABF19EE}&page-id={24C33B3B-BD97-429D-8F88-EC3E0C009316}&object-id={971B4C1A-0010-4F3E-AABA-A780D1976F56}&10&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Mauryan%20Empire.one)

28. Do you agree with the popular view that Mauryas established a unitary and highly centralized if not monolithic state system? [2018, 20 Marks]
-   [Was the state highly centralised or decentralised ?](onenote:[[Polity]],%20Administration&section-id={C0CC9BD8-A1E3-4D8E-BE38-44EB6ABF19EE}&page-id={08E1D93E-F45B-43E6-9A30-6BFEA591E5D7}&object-id={1CEC5737-FECD-4CC1-93C3-7CCC97362386}&B&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Mauryan%20Empire.one)

20. Analyse the causes of the success of the Magadhan imperialism upto the reign of Ashoka the Great. [2001, 60m]
-   [Causes of Success of Mauryan Empire :](onenote:[[Foundation]]%20of%20Mauryan%20Empire&section-id={C0CC9BD8-A1E3-4D8E-BE38-44EB6ABF19EE}&page-id={2B669907-4D11-4040-8898-65EA7FEA14F8}&object-id={AF2D4589-B9A9-4350-BBCD-2787710358EB}&F&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Ancient%20History/Part%20II/Mauryan%20Empire.one)