# Chandragupta, Kautilya and Arthashastra
2020-04-27 11:47:48
            
---


## Kautilya and Arthashastra :

-   Detailed treatise on **statecraft**
-   states Artha is superior to Dharma and Kama
-   has 15 books 
	-   1st 5 deal with internal administration (tantra) 
	-   the next 8 with inter-state relations 
	-   last 2 with miscellaneous
-   Major problem with using it is date and authorship
-   text **emphasizes imperial ideals and ambitions**
-   **Outlines administrative structure, salaries etc**
-   Arthashastra does not contain any references to Mauryas, their empire, Chandragupta, or Pataliputra could be because it is theoretical not a descriptive work on a particular state
-   **element of unity is lacking**

### Role of Women in Arthshastra :
- [x] #todo   
- Women were employed as spies under the M empire. Kautilya says that they were more efficient than men. 
- Lusting for women was considered one of the Vices by Kautilya along w/ gambling, drinking.
- women have been shown as supporting men. Women as wives have been presented only as rearer of children. Says that W do not have brain of their own. 
- Women ex widows are not mentioned as inhertor of property. If there were no heirs king took the property. During remarriage she was to leave her property to either the husband or his sons from the first marriage. But there are also reference to rich widows.
- Emphasis is laid on chastity before marriage which was to be punished if not conformed with. Defines the age of puberty ofr girls as 12.
- Certain sexual relations were prohibited. Thus, A tried to control the sexuality of women in Mauryan society.
- Adultery was a crime with punishment being amputation of nose and ears. 
- Rape was a punishable offence with varying degree from death to fines from 12 panas onwards. Punishment to city guards for misbehaving w/ women. Punishments depended on the status of women.
- Abortion was a crime. 
- Worked in agricultural fields and pastures along w/ men. Spinning sector of textile  was reserved for women, particularly for those who had no other means of livelihood Ex widows, cripples, mothers of prostitutes. But cheating in these sectors were punished severely.
- Women, Children were employed in collecting and preparing ingredients making alcoholic liquor.
- Occupation mentioned are shampooing, preparing bath, making garland, perfumery etc.
- Employed by the state for prostitution, women entertainers, actresses. Who were often used as assassins.
- A female bonded labour was not to be beaten, treated violently etc. 
- Contract made by woman dependent on here husband or son was not valid. 



