# Ashoka, Concept of Dharma
2020-04-27 11:48:05
            
---


##  Ashoka (268 - 232 BCE) :

-   **Ashovadana**, **Divyadana, Vamsatthapakasini, Dipavamasa and Mahavamsa** talks about Ashoka's life, wife Devi and their sons Mahinda and Sanghamitta ^c88462
-   **Inscriptions** suggests extent of empire upto Kandahar, Orissa; almost the entire sub-continent except the southernmost parts
-   After his death the empire quickly disintegrated due to invasion of Bactrian Greeks
-   **James Princep** deciphered Brahmi inscription referring to a king called Devanampiya Piyadasi; Maski Inscription
-   tried to establish a **system of rule based on the principle of Dhamma**
-   Ashoka was the **viceroy of Ujjain** married the daughter of a Merchant from Vidisha and had 2 children 
-   Conquered Kalinga for strategic reasons -> trade routes to south India by land and by sea
-   war took place 8 yrs after his consecration around 260 BC
-   After this was he turned towards Dhamma and a policy of conquest through Dhammavijaya
-   bordering empires were Cholas, Pandyas, Sataputras and Keralaputras in the south. Whereas Kambojas and Yavanas along with Bhojas, Pitinikas, Andhras and Pulindas were some living within the empire.
-   Conquest territories were called **Vijita** and 'royal territories' as **Rajavishaya** and bordering territories **Prayatna**.
 

##  Concept of Dharma 
-   variously translated as piety, moral life, righteousness and so on
-   It was not any particular religious faith or practice, was also not an arbitrarily formulated royal policy
-   was related to the norms of social behaviour and activities in a very general sense 
 
###  Causes/Need of Dhamma :
 
-   **Ashoka's private beliefs** and his own perceptions of how he should **respond to the problems of his empire** were responsible for the formulation of the policy of Dhamma
-   Ashoka ascended the throne where the **political, social and cultural concepts had matured**. To maintain the existent social structure he had to either use force or make a set of complex social norms and make people follow them
-   Bring about harmony b/w the heterodox sects and the Brahmanical fold that had emerged.
-   For the empire to survive there had to be some sort of social, cultural uniformity among the various groups that existed viz the Yavanas, Tribal groups, Brahmanical religion and Heterodox sects.
 
###  Contents of Dhamma
-   was **not given any formal definition** or structure 
- RE 1 banned animal sacrifices and reports decrease in killing of animals. Pillar Edict PE 5 mentions more such prohibitions.
-   In RE 12 he emphasised on toleration of people themselves and also on toleration of their various beliefs and ideas. And exercise restraint in criticising other sects and praising their own.
-   Non-violence was to be practised by giving up war and conquests and also as a restraint on the killing of animals. This was one of the most remarkable innovative aspect of his dhamma.
-   included certain welfare measures, like planting of trees, digging of wells, etc
-   In RE 9 ceremonies and sacrifices were attacked as being meaningless especially by women performed during illness, marriage, birth etc. It also describes the ceremony of dhamma  and mentions : 
	-   consideration towards slaves and servants
	-   obedience to elders
	-   generosity towards the needy, Brahmanas and Sramanas, etc.
- RE 11 is similar to RE 9 it also mentions gift of dhamma being greatest gift of all.
-   Dhamma mahamattah were instituted to implement and publicise Dhamma. 
- His contents were read out in public during auspicious days like full moon etc.
-   has been written in the 14 Major Rock Edicts of Ashoka.
 

### Ashoka did not favour Buddhism - Evidences :
-   Dhammamahamattas *office did not favour any particular religion*. If he was partisan he could have used the Sangha to propagate Dhamma
-   He wanted to *promote tolerance and respect* for all religious sects and the duty of the Dhammamahamattas to ensure this this can be deduced from his rock inscriptions.
 

###  Role of Dhamma on the downfall of empire
- [x]  #todo 

> Haraprasad Sastri has suggested that Pushyamitra Sunga's coup showed Brahmanical revolution as a result of Ashoka's Dhamma.
- It is possible that Ashoka's ban on animal sacrifices may have annoyed Brahmana livelihood.
- Appointment of Dhamma Mahamatas may have struck Brahmana prestige as custodians of social morality.
- However Sastri's interpretations are wrong since in his edicts Ashoka had mentioned to respect both the Sramana and Brahmanas.
- Ashoka's followed a pacifist policy as a result of his Dhamma. However, he was pragmatic and did not disband the army and also warned the tribal communities to not make nuisance. He also did not abolish capital punishment.
- Reasons for downfall have to searched on the weakness of the political structure and lack of later able rulers in the dynasty than in Dhamma. 
- Unable to restructure economy and the tendency of the fringes to act independent were some other reasons.
- Romila Thapar has mentioned the lack of nationalism, idea of loyalty to state, lack of popular representative institution.   
 

###  Ideas of Dhamma in Vedas, Upanishads [^1] [^2]
- Both the Vedas and Buddhist canonicals have the concept of Dhamma in them. 
- Rig Veda mentions it at least 56 times the root of the word means to uphold or support. In most cases it means religious rites and in some other cases it meant 'fixed principles or rules of conduct'.
- In Chandogya Upanishad there is an important passage a/c to which there are 3 branches of dharma : 
	- one is constituted by sacrifice, study and charity; 
	- second is constituted by austerities and 
	- third is the brahmacharin dwelling in house of his teacher and making himself sudy with the family of the teacher till last. 
	- All of them attain immortality.
- In Taittiriya Upanishad it is  'Speak the truth, practice your dharma' here it means the standard conduct as a mem of Aryan community as member of one caste as a person in a particular stage of life.
- The Vedas are however the source of Dharma.
- Dhamma in Buddhism is interpreted to mean 'the teaching of the Buddha'. Accorting to him it is overcoming suffering or dukkha.
- It gives people a way of life to achieved enlightenment by following the noble eigthfold path.
- Many of the Buddhas views in the eightfold path found mentions in the vedas and upanishads. 
- Both say to follow dhamma but their definition of dhamma is different wherein lie the dissimilarity.
 

###  Historians Views on Dhamma
- [x]   #todo 
- The Dhamma that was mentioned in his inscriptions and the concept of Buddhist Dhamma were different.
- Historians hold different views about the nature of Ashokas Dhamma. It has been seen as a sort of universal religion containing common elements of other religious traditions. 
- It has been interpreted as a form of raja-dharma/ Dharma of a king consisting of political and moral principles.
- It has been understood as a form of Buddhist Upasaka dhamma.
- And also been seen as all of the above rolled into one.

**Romila Thapar's Views on Dhamma** 
- Thapar has underlined the political rationale behind the propagation of dhamma.
- She has minimised the Buddhist elements in his Dhamma asserting that there was no connection b/w personal beliefs of Ashoka and his public proclamations.
- It was an ideological tool to consolidate his large empire and to get support of non orthodox elements.
- as being a bond for the empire, common social way of life
- A/c to her Dhamma was Ashoka's own invention for a way of moral life for people in general to follow. 
- Ashoka's Dhamma meant righteousness. 
- For Ashoka it was to give him socio-political order in his empire that would make it easy to govern.

**Upinder SIngh**
- Ashokas inscriptions do not contain ideas of Buddhas teaching ex Dukkha, 8 fold path etc.
- But there is a definitve Buddhist core clear from ther repeated emphasis on ahimsa and in the 3rd century BC Buddhism along with Jainism were prominent sects that emphasised ahimsa.
- There is also similarity b/w duty oriented ethics of inscriptions and Buddhist upasaka dhamma as mentioned in Sigalvada Sutta.
- Bhabru rock edict lists 6 Buddhist texts as texts on dhamma.
- His ideas that king owes debt to all his subjects has Buddhist connotation.
- Buddhist element can also been seen in his sculpture as well ex Girnar rock mentions white elephant bringing happiness to the world. Elephant appears in Dhauli inscription as well.
- Buddhist archaeological remains have been found around many Ashokan pillars.  


 ---
[[fess107.pdf]] - Our Pasts I NCERT | Ashoka, the Emperor who gave up war.

---

 




[^1]: http://himalaya.socanth.cam.ac.uk/collections/journals/bot/pdf/bot_2000_01-03_03.pdf
[^2]: https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zr7ck2p/revision/1