# Quotes

2020-10-30 13:12:28

```toc
```

---

## Gender Equality

 >"A gender-equal society would be one where the word 'gender' does not exist: where everyone can be themselves"
 --- GLORIA STEINEM

 >***"**Gender equality is more than a goal in itself. It is a precondition for meeting the challenge of reducing poverty, promoting sustainable development and building good governance**"***
 **---
KOFI ANNAN**

 >***"**I measure the progress of a community by the degree of progress which women have achieved**"***
 **---
B. R. AMBEDKAR**

## Women

 >***"**You educate a man, you educate a man. You educate a woman, you educate a generation**"***
 **--- BRIGHAM YOUNG**

 >***"**To educate girls is to reduce poverty**"***
 **--- KOFI ANNAN**

 >***"**Empower a woman - Empower a community**"***
 **--- KOFI ANNAN**

 >***"**When women do better economies do better**"***
 **--- CHRISTINA LAGARDE**

 >***"**The measure of any society is how it treats its women and girls**"***
 **--- MICHELLE OBAMA**

> "If women are expected to do the same work as men, we must teach them the same things." **Plato**

## Humanity

 >"You must not lose faith in humanity. Humanity is an ocean; if a few drops of the ocean are dirty, the ocean does not become dirty." -- Mahatma Gandhi

 >"To deny people their human rights is to challenge their very humanity." -- Nelson Mandela

> "Love and compassion are necessities, not luxuries. Without them, humanity cannot survive." -- [Dalai Lama](https://borgenproject.org/10-facts-dalai-lama/)

 >"An individual has not started living until he can rise above the narrow confines of his individualistic concerns to the broader concerns of all humanity." -- [Martin Luther King, Jr.](https://borgenproject.org/5-interesting-facts-about-martin-luther-king-jr/)

 >"The sole meaning of life is to serve humanity." -- Leo Tolstoy

> "The greatness of humanity is not in being human, but in being humane." -- Mahatma Gandhi

## Poverty

 >***"**Poverty is like a punishment for a crime you didn't commit.**"***
 **--- ELI KHAMAROV**

 >"As long as poverty, injustice and gross inequality exist in the world, none of us can truly exist." *-- Nelson Mandela*

 >"Extreme poverty anywhere is a threat to human security everywhere." *-- Kofi Annan*

> "Poverty is the parent of revolution and crime." *-- Aristotle*

> "You can't get rid of poverty by giving people money." *-- J. O'Rourke*

## Health

 >***"**It is the health that is real wealth and not pieces of gold and silver**"***
 **--- MAHATMA GANDHI**

 >"Physical fitness is the first requisite of happiness." -- Joseph Pilates

 >"To keep the body in good health is a duty…otherwise we shall not be able to keep the mind strong and clear." -- Buddha

 >"Divide each difficulty into as many parts as is feasible and necessary to resolve it, and watch the whole transform." -- Rene Descartes

 >"Healthy citizens are the greatest asset any country can have." -- Winston Churchil

## Environment and Climate Change

 >***"**What we are doing to the forests of the world is but a mirror reflection of what we are doing to ourselves and to one another**"***
 **--- MAHATMA GANDHI**

> ***"**Climate change is simply, the greatest collective challenge we face as a human family**"***
 **--- BAN KI MOON**

 >"I only feel angry when I see waste. When I see people throwing away things we could use."
 ---Mother Teresa

 >"The Earth is what we all have in common."
 ---Wendell Berry

 >"Time spent among trees is never time wasted."
 ---Anonymous

> "He that plants trees loves others besides himself."
 ---Thomas Fuller

 >"One of the first conditions of happiness is that the link between man and nature shall not be broken."
 ---Leo Tolstoy

 >"Nature is painting for us, day after day, pictures of infinite beauty."
 ---John Ruskin

## Sustainable Dev

 >"The best way to predict the future is to create it." ~ Peter Drucker

> "There are no passengers on spaceship earth. We are all crew." ~ Marshall McLuhan

> "Sustainability is here to stay or we may not be" ~ Niall FitzGerald

 >"Ownership is a sine qua non of sustainable development." ~ James Wolfensohn

## Youth

 >We cannot always build the future for our youth, but we can build our youth for the future. - Franklin D. Roosevelt

 >Preventing the conflicts of tomorrow means changing the mindset of youth today. - Graça Mache

 >The foundation of every state is the education of its youth. - Diogenes

> Youth is a quality, not a matter of circumstances. - Frank Lloyd Wright

 >Youth lives on hope, old age on memories. - Unknown

## Education

> "Live as if you were to die tomorrow. Learn as if you were to live forever."
**Mahatma Gandhi**

 >"Children must be taught how to think, not what to think."
**Margaret Mead**

 >"I have never let my schooling interfere with my Education."
**Mark Twain**

> "Education is what remains after one has forgotten what one has learnt in school."
**Einstein**

 >"It is the mark of an educated mind to be able to entertain a thought without accepting it."
**Aristotle**

 >"Education is the manifestation of perfection already in man."
**Swami Vivekananda**

## Ethics

 >***"**Happiness is when what you think, what you say, and what you do are in a harmony**"***
 **--- MAHATMA GANDHI**

 >***"**Be truthful, gentle and fearless**"***
 **--- MAHATMA GANDHI**

## Children

 >Children are one third of our population and all of our future.

 >History will judge us by the difference we make in the everyday lives of children. Nelson Mandela

 >Let us sacrifice our today so that our children can have a better tomorrow. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam

 >You can learn many things from how much patience have for instance. franklin p jones wisdom

 >You are the bows from which your children as living arrows are sent forth. Kahlil Gibran

## Science and Tech

> "The science of today is the technology of tomorrow." ~ Edward Teller

 >"One machine can do the work of fifty ordinary men. No machine can do the work of one extraordinary man." ~ Elbert Hubbard

> "It has become appallingly obvious that our technology has exceeded our humanity." ~ Albert Einstein

 >"The saddest aspect of life right now is that science gathers knowledge faster than society gathers wisdom." ~ Isaac Asimov

> "Science is the great antidote to the poison of enthusiasm and superstition." ~ Adam Smith

 >"Science without religion is lame, religion without science is blind." ~ Albert Einstein

 >"Computers are useless. They can only give you answers." ~ Pablo Picasso

> "We have guided missiles and misguided men." ~ Martin Luther King, Jr.

 >"Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic." ~ Arthur C. Clarke

## Agriculture

 >Earth is here so kind, that just tickle her with a hoe and she laughs with a harvest.
 Douglas Jerrold

 >Agriculture is the foundation of manufactures, since the productions of nature are the materials of art. - Edward Gibbon

> Agriculture was the first occupation of man, and as it embraces the whole earth, it is the foundation of all other industries.
 Edward W. Stewart

> If farm ecology and economics go wrong, nothing else will go right in agriculture.
 M. S. Swaminathan

> Agriculture is the process of turning eco-systems into people.
 Toby Hemenway

> A sustainable agriculture is one which depletes neither the people nor the land.
 Wendell Berry

## Religion

> "All thinking men are atheists."
**Ernst Hemingway
**

 >"The notion that Science and Spirituality are somehow mutually exclusive does a disservice to both."
**Carl Sagan**

 >"Science without Religion is lame and Religion without Science is blind"
**Einstein**

> "What can be asserted without evidence can be dismissed without evidence."
**Christopher Hitchens**

## Democracy

 >The best argument against democracy is a five-minute conversation with the average voter."
**Churchill**

> "The tyranny of a prince in an oligarchy is not so much dangerous to the public welfare as the apathy of a citizen in a democracy"
**Montesquieu**

> "The ballot is stronger than the bullet."
**Abraham Lincoln**

 >"There cannot be daily democracy without daily citizenship."
**Ralph Nader**

> " I understand democracy as something that gives the weak the same chance as the strong."
**Mahatma Gandhi**

 >"Democracy is not law of the majority but protection of the minority."
**Albert Camus**

 >"In a democracy, the individual enjoys not only the ultimate power, but carries the ultimate responsibility."
**Norman Cousins**

## Peace Justice

 >"When the power of love overcomes the love of power, the world will know peace." William Gladstone

 >"Peace and Justice are two sides of the same coin."
**Eisenhower**

> "Poverty is the worst form of violence."
**Mahatma Gandhi**

## Liberty

> "They who can give up essential liberty to obtain a little temporary safety deserve neither liberty nor safety."
**Benjamin Franklin**

 >"If liberty means anything at all, it means the right to tell people what they do not want to hear."
**George Orwell**

 >"Liberty means responsibility. That is why most men dread it." **George B. Shaw**

> "When governments fear the people, there is liberty. When the people fear the government, there is tyranny." **Thomas Jefferson**

## Mahatma Gandhi's Quotes

2020-11-22 13:08:02

---

>"Happiness is when what you think, what you say, and what you do are in a harmony"

<br>

>"Be truthful, gentle and fearless"

<br>

>"We must become the change we want to see"

<br>

>"To believe in something, and not live it, is dishonest"

<br>

> SEVEN DANGERS/Sins TO HUMAN VIRTUE

1. Wealth without work
2. Pleasure without conscience
3. Knowledge without character
4. Business without ethics
5. Science without humanity
6. Religion without sacrifice
7. Politics without principle

<br>

>"You must not lose faith in humanity. Humanity is an ocean; if a few drops of the ocean area dirty, the ocean does not become dirty"

<br>

>"The best way to find yourself is to lose yourself in the service of others"

<br>

>"An eye for an eye only ends up making the whole world blind"

<br>

>"Strength does not come from physical capacity. It comes from an indomitable will"

<br>

>"It has always been a mystery to me how men can feel themselves honored by the humiliation of their fellow beings"

<br>

>"Peace is its own reward"

<br>

>"The mind is everything. What you think, you become"

<br>
