# Major Administrative Policies of Jahangir, Shahjahan and Aurangzeb
2020-04-26 19:31:34
```toc
```
---

##  Jahangir's administrative policies

### Chain of Justice 
- a golden chain several maunds heavy near Agra fort 
- where people seeking justice could come and ring the bells of the chain.
- He put to death the attendant of Muqarrab Khan, governor of Gujarat and reduced his mansab by half after he was found to have outraged a widows daughter.

### Issued 12 rules of Conduct (Dastur ul Amal)
-   He abolished Tagma and Meerwahi which were toll taxes
-   Ordered the construction of sarais, mosques, wells etc on the sides of roads
-   Property of the dead to be passed to their legal heirs and if unclaimed to the state
-   He banned the manufacture of sale of intoxicants
-   Disallowed the mutilation of criminals' hands
-   Land lords could not forcibly occupy the lands of farmers
-   Constructed Hospitals and appointed physicians Hakims in them
-   Animal slaughter was banned on 2 days of the week ie Thursday and Sunday
-   Sunday was held as special day
-   Reinstate mansabdars appointed under Akbar's reign
-   Jagirs known as Aima and Madadgar was granted to religious and charitable institutions
-   Convicts who served long periods in jails were released.
---
- Mughal court and the emperor personally was the arbiter of standards and was assisted by Nur Jahan.
- One of his major success after defeating Rana of Mewar and Malik Ambar was the consolidation of Mughal Position in Bengal.
	- He posted Islam Khan the grandsom of Shaikh Salim Chisti the patron saints of Mughals.
	- Islam Khan won over many zamindars including Raja of Jessore and fixed his HQ at Dacca which was strategically located.
	- He broke the back of Afghans in the region and captured areas such as Sonargaon.
	- Jessore, Sylhet, Cachar and Kamrup were captured. Provincial capital was transferred from Rajmahal to Dacca.
- If a anyone died his property and effects should be his heirs and if not then it should go for building mosques, sarais, repair broken bridges and digging of tanks and wells.
- Forcible possession of the raiyats land and persons house should not be done.
- Hospitals were to be founded in great cities and doctors appointed.
- Prohibited cutting of nose or ears of anyone as punishment 

##  Shah Jahan (1627-1658) administrative policies
 
-   Padshahnama says that Shah Jahan had ordered that officers who remained in their Jagirs had to keep soldiers 1/3rd in number of their rank of zat.
-   officers who were posted outside their Jagirs but within the frontiers of India had to maintain 1/4th and those who were posted outside India had to keep only l/5th of the number of their zat rank.
-   Shah Jahan increased the state-demand. 
-   peasants asked to pay between 33 to 50 per cent of their produce as revenue on the entire land whether cultivated or partly cultivated.
-   gave the right of collecting the revenue to contractors. It reduced the expenditure of the state but left the peasants at the mercy of contractors.
-   His measures adversely affected the condition of the peasants
-   During his reign the Marwari horse was introduced, becoming Shah Jahan's favourite, and various Mughal cannons were mass-produced in the Jaigarh Fort.


##  Aurangzeb's Administrative policies
- [x]   #todo 
- Aurangzeb was devoted to the study of Quran and hagiographical literature strictly observed various religious rituals. 
- Dara called Aurangzeb a hypocrite and Aurangzeb called Dara a heretic.
- Aurangzeb advanced towards Agra along with Murad. He defeated Shah Jahan's forces at Dharmat in 1658.
- A managed to win over many Rajput rajas and nobles and defeated Dara at the Battle of Samugarh on 29 May 1659.
 - It was not a battle b/w religous orthodoxy and liberalism. Both Hindus and Muslims were equally divided.
 - He promised Murad to Punjab, Kabul, Kashmir and Sindh but after defeating Darah imprisoned Murad in Gwalior and killed him 2 years later.
 - Shuja was defeated and fled to Arakan where he was killed by the Arakanese for fomenting rebellion.
 - He was a strict disciplinarian who even imprisoned his sons. 

### Administrative policies in Deccan
- Transferred a cadre of experienced Mughal officers here. Golconda was divided into 9 sarkars with a faujdar at each HQ.
- Hyderabadi-Karnataka was made into a separate charge so was Bijapuri-Karnataka.
- New assessment of Golconda was done with help of local deshmukhs. 
- Ijara (revenue farming) was abolished but must have continued at the lower levels.
- Land revenue demand was raised by 13% and 4% was fixed as jizya.
- All Brahmans in imperial posts were removed. Deshmukhs were restored to their old position but not given official posts or their contingent made part of royal army. Only 1 of them were given mansabs.

 
##  Influence of Mughal Adm policy on other Regional States 
- [ ]   #todo 





