# The Ahom Kingdom
2020-04-27 12:32:10
```toc
``` 
---

- [x] #todo 
- Rulers of Kamrup and Kamta brought under their control area b/w Kartoya and Barnadi rivers.
- To their East were the Ahoms who belonged to the Tai tribe of south China and other south-east Asian countries.
- Who came from Yunan in 13th century and estd their control over Dibrugarh and Sibsagar.
- A new language Assamese based in intermingling of various tribal language emerged. 
- Its first work was Hem Saraswati's Prahlat Charit.
- Neo Vaishnavites movt under Shankaradeva rose.
- Period of 15th century can be called a period of literary and cultural renaissance in Assam. 
- Also the period of steady Hinduizaion of Ahoms. Bhakti saints lived in centres called namghoras -> dev as centre of literature and faith
- the period of 15th century saw the decline of Kamata kingdom and was replaced by the Cooch Behar/ Kuch rulers who clashed with the Ahoms.
- After the decline of Kuch rule they invited the Mughals into the area and thus led to Mughal Ahom clashes.


## Resistance to Mughal Empire
- [x]   #todo 
- Mir Jumla was the governor of Bengal who wanted entire Assam to be annexed Cooch behar and then invaded Ahom Kingdom.
- Mir Jumla occupied Ahom and held it for 6 months despite rains and a close seige by Ahoms. 
- Ahom king signed a humiliating treaty in 1663. 
- Later after Mir Jumla died the Ahoms renewed their effors and drove the Mughals back recovering even the Cooch Behar areas.
- War continued for 10 more years. 
- Ahoms had infantry, elephants and a strong navy relied mostly on Guerilla mode of warfare.
- Ahoms during emergency could mobilise all able men about 100,000 in total.
- Later the Mughals accepted river Manas to be the boundary b/w them and the Ahoms.
- **Lachit Borphukan** was a military commander of the Ahom kingdom who led in the 1671 Battle of Saraighat thwarted attempt of Mughals.

## Certain features of Ahom state
- Ahoms mostly  depended on forced labours and such labourers were called paiks. For its enforcement census was taken of the village. Each village had to send a number of paiks on a rotation basis.
- Till 17th century end administration became centralised. All male served in the army. And at other times were engaged in building dams, irrigation etc systems.
- Introduced new methods of rice cultivation and declared capture of wild elephants as royal monopoly.

## PYQs


**The Ahom Kingdom**


1. Write a short essay on: "The Ahom Kingdom" [2008, 20m]
-   [The Ahom Kingdom](onenote: [[The]] %20Ahom%20Kingdom&section-id={28246277-2B89-4E79-8E90-9CF1B0AA2733}&page-id={14288913-7599-4E6A-878F-167FA8579438}&end&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Mughal%20Empire%20in%2017th%20Century.one )




2. Give a brief account of resistance offered by Ahom State against the Mughal rule. [2014,
10m]
-   [Resistance to Mughal Empire](onenote: [[The]] %20Ahom%20Kingdom&section-id={28246277-2B89-4E79-8E90-9CF1B0AA2733}&page-id={14288913-7599-4E6A-878F-167FA8579438}&object-id={F4980A2D-8070-4226-B3FD-DDBB86F4EA95}&C&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Mughal%20Empire%20in%2017th%20Century.one )





