# The Lodhis
2020-04-27 12:26:16
```toc
```

---

- After Timur's Invasion the Governor of Multan Khizr Khan was appt head of Delhi.
- After the return of Tughlaq sultan he fled and set up a new Sayyid dynasty.
- Sayyids seeked Bahlul's help against Jaunpur and Khokars of punjab.
- BL estd himself in Punjab and took over Delhi.
- @ BL invited farmers of Roh to India who came like locusts says Abbas Sarwani -> changed the complexion of Muslim society in India.

## The Lodhis 

-   established by **Bahlul Lodhi**, were **Aghans** in 1451
- ~  reached its zenith under Sikandar Lodhi
-   After his death the empire was divided between Jalal Khan Lodhi and Ibriahim Lodi.
-   Jalal was imprisoned in Gwalior but he escaped before being captured by Gond tribals.
-   His escape made Ibrahim suspicious of the old nobles
-   He started to put his favorites in key positions making old nobles and his kin like Daulat Khan, Alam Khan etc to conspire against him with Babur.

### Sikandar Lodi 1489-1517
- Contemporary of Mahmud Begarha, Rana Sanga.
- Reaffirmed supremacy of Sultan over his nobles, who had to submit accounts of his jagirs regularly.
- ~ Drastic punishments for those who embezzled money or were corrupt. 
- Estd efficient administration in his kingdom w/ emphasis on justice. Roads were cleared from robbers and bandits.
- Prices of goods were cheap. 
- ~ Abolished Octroid tax, estd new measurement of yard called **Gaz i Sikandari**.
- Rent rolls or Jama prepared in his time formed basis of Sher Shah's jama.
- @ Regarded as Orthodox sometimes even bigoted king. Reimposed Jiziya, Women could not visit grave or saints. Demolished temples at Nagarkot.
- Gave liberal grants to scholars, philosophers etc. No of Sanskrit works were translated into Persian. 
- Estd city of Agra in 1506. 


### Nature of State 
-   Afghan monarchy was primarily tribal in nature.
-   King was first among equals, nobles enjoyed complete local autonomy except for military serivce.
- &  A change in this was brought by Sikandar Lodi, he demanded obesience from nobles who were treated like servants.
-   Aghans however continued to assume high titles like Khan i Jahan, Khan i Khanan, Anam Humayun and Khan i Azam.
-   This centralisation process was accelarated under Ibrahim.
-   This led to dissatisfaction among nobles.


### General Administration 

- @  The practice of audits was introduced by Sikandar to check accounts of Muqtas and Walis. He also reorganised the intelligence system.
-   Mubarak Khan governor of Jaunpur and Khwaja Asgar were charged for corruption.
-   Charity houses to dispense financial aids etc was opened in Delhi.
-   Scholar, poets and Educational institutions were organised.
-   There was a ban on any other language except Persian in gov offices.


### Economy #important  

-   Sikandar adopted a definite agri development policy because the empire was landlocked.
-   He prohibited the system of begar to encourage agriculture.
-   States share was 1/3rd and official who collected it were Patwari, Khots and Muqqadams
-   Zakat was abolished.
-   There were 3 modes of revenue assessment Crop Sharing (batai), measurement (zabt) and appraisal (Kankut).
-   He introduced the Gaz i Sikandari as a standard of measurement.
 





