# Mughal Empire First Phase :  Babur and Humayun
2020-04-27 12:26:26
```toc
```

---

- [ ] Empire Builder in North India, Turko-Mongol theory of sovereignty. 

## Babur (1526-1530)

### Who was Babur and Who were the Mughals? 
- [ ] #todo


### Early Life of Babar and Struggle for Samarkand.
-  There was a tripartite struggle for transoxiana/Samarkand which was captured by Sahbani khan after defeating Babar and late Mongol Khans to fixate his position at Samarkand.
-  Unable to defeat Shaibani Khan he had to move towards Hindu Kush.
- @ Shaibani khan had used the Uzbek technique of Tulghuma/Wheeling tactics against Babar which he used against Ibrahim Khan. 
- Babar captured Kabul and Ghazni in 1504 it gave him and his begs a breathing space.

> **Rushbrooke Williams**  : He could turn eye his eyes west to Samarkand or east to Hindustan
-  After he captured Kabul. Shahbani khan occupied Herat. Sensing trouble at frontier of Iran. Safavid Shah Ismail marched against him and defeated him at Merv.
-  Babur forged good relations w/ Safavid Shah. And with the help of Persian army occupied Tranoxiana. But day to day interference by Persian on court made him aloof.
-  Persian were defeated by Uzbeks later. Babur had to withdraw from Transoxiana and had to turn towards India. This was in 1514.

### Invasion of Hindu Kush and conquest of India.
- Babar in his memoir has mentioned that he immediately made a move into Hindustan in 1504 but this was more of a foray to extract levies from Afghan chiefs.

#### Reasons for the Invasion of India
1. Babur's repeated failure to capture Samarkand as mentioned above.
2. Political Situation in India : 
	- Sikandar Lodhi had died and the empire was split b/w Ibrahim and his brother Jalal. Ibrahim soon captured Jalal and executed him -> led to rebellion from older Afghan nobles.
	- Meanwhile Rana Sanga estd power in Eastern Malwa.   
3. Revival of Power of Uzbeks around Transoxiana
4. Financial Difficulties : 
	> **Abul Fazl** : Babur ruled over Badakshan, Kabul and Qandahar that did not yield sufficient income to maintain army
	- The revenue realised form exports and import of goods from Kabul was not enough to meet the needs of Babur, his begs and the army

- @ Bajaur expedition marked the beginning of Baburs efforts to conquer India. Babur used wholesale massacre against Bajauris who were mostly afghans which as per Rushbrooke Williams was to teach them a lesson.
-   Babur had invaded India 4 times before Panipat. **Bhira** in 1519-20, **Sialkot** in 1520 and **Lahore** in 1524 and Panipat.
-   B was invited by Daulat Khan Lodhi a noble to invade India expecting him to withdraw.

#### Battle of Panipat 20 April 1526
- Before Panipat in 1524 Babur started supporting Alam Khan's claim for Delhi to rival Ibrahim.
- Later Alam Khan revoked B support and along w/ Daulat Khan Lodi attacked Delhi but was defeated by Ibrahim.
- Babur by then had strengthened his flank by capturing Balkh and Kandahar. 
- After reaching panipat he fortified his position by digging a ditch at his left and towards his right was Panipat city.
- ~  On the front he ussed the Rumi (Ottoman) method of joining carts together by ropes and b/w every two carts were breastworks used by matchlockmen to fire. 
	-   He was 1st in India to use artillery, Ottoman gunners Ustad ALi and Mustafa. 
	-   His mounted archers kept Ibrahim engaged while using the Tulghuma/ wheeling/ flanking the position of Ibrahim from sides and rear.
- Politically the battle was not decisive since he had to contend w/ powers of Rana Sanga and other Afghans.
- But it smashed the power of Lodis, gave him much needed treasures opened up the entire Gangetic valley upto Jaunpur to conquer.

#### Struggle w/ Rana Sanga of Mewat and other Problems of Babur
- Local population was very hostile since the sack of Delhi by Timur was still fresh. 
- Many inhabitants had deserted towas and villages had taken to robbery.
- His begs found India to be a foreign country. 
- ~ His 2 biggest dangers were Rana Sanga and the Eastern Afghans.
- !  Rana Sanga along with Hasan Khan Mewati and Mahmud Lodi made an alliance against Babur making a Rajput-Afghan alliance.
-   B gave it a religious color by calling it a Jihad, renounced drinking wine, and after the war allowed Begs to go back to Kabul if they wanted.
- $  Ferishta and Badauni talked about the fear among Baburs men of the Rajput army.
- &  They met at Khanwa on 17th March 1527. Where Babur emerged victorious. #important 
-   At Khanua he used the same tactics as Panipat of Rumi and Tulghuma. RS had not learnt from B's win at Panipat. 

  > **Rushbrooke Williams** : Powerful confederacy of Mewar was shattered by a single defeat and ceased to become a dominant factor in politics of Hindustan.
-   The Afghans under Nusrat Shah coalesced against Babur but were defeated.

#### Consolidation of rules and subjugation of regional rulers
- B first dealt w/ Afghan iqtadars or commanders of forts, towns on countryside. Followed a policy of force and concilliation by giving them parganas at different places.
- Afghans of Eastern UP who have been rebellious even against Ibrahim were tried to be conquered by sending Humayun but he later withdrew against Sanga's threat.
- Bihar and Bengal : Afghan rebels saw these areas as sanctuaries where they could retreat/regroup to resist Mughals. B. defeated these Kingdoms at battle of Ghaghra in 1529.

### Significance and Impact of his advent
- Political : Indian became center of Central Asian politics, earlier Afghanistan used to be the base of operations now Delhi became hub of strategic control and foregin policy.
- Economic : Strengthened India's foreign trade and inc IN share in Central Asian Trade.
- Introduced use of cannons/artilery and muskets. New methods of fighting, skillful generalship, organisation etc was introduced.
- Helped establish the prestige of Crown. 

### Turko-Mughal theory of Sovereignty. What was it? How did it originate and Develop?
- [ ] #todo 


## Humayun (1530-1540)

### Problems faced by him during succession.
- Unsettled state of administration and stretched finances.
	- H took certain steps to organise the govt and court society. He divided court society into administrative, ecclesiastical and cultural sections. 
	- A form of grades were given through dividing arrows of different quality and numbers.
	- ~ He instituted a drum of justice/ tabl i adl so that people could bring grievances to him. 
	- Remitted tamgha and other cesses for foreign traders.
- Ambitions of begs who wanted to assert themselves. Ex Khalifa Nizamuddin wanted Mehdi Khwaja to become ruler.
- Various Timurid princes such as Zaman Mirza who had joined B after being expelled from Uzbek. 
- @ His brothers such as Kamran's airs of independence. Kamran soon after B death occupied Lahore. Humayun was more concerned with Eastern Afghans so he confirmed it and also gave him Hisar Firouza as Iqta. This encouraged his other brothers Askari and Hindal. 
- Eastern Afghans from UP, Bihar, Bengal which culminated into his defeat by Sher Shah in 1535.
- Bahadur Shah of Gujarat.

### Tussle with Bahadur Shah of Gujarat
- H after capturing Kalinjar in Bundelkhand came into conflict with BSoG who had captured Mandu.
- H had a brief encounter with Sher Khan where he was defeated and had offered to serve under the emperor.  However, BS was a bigger threat.
- BS had employed a lot of begs, timurid princes as refugees this had irked H. He had also gained victories against other rulers.
- Had employed Ottomons Rumi Khan and Khwaja Safar as master gunners.
-   Bahadur Shah of Gujarat formed an alliance with with various enemies of Humayun namely Sher Shah, Nusrat Shah, Alauddin Lodi etc.
-   He also gave shelter to Mughal rebel Muhammad Zaman Mirza.
-   BS was 1st to start hostilities by Siege of Chitoor. Maharani Karnavati is said to have sent H rakhi to help her. 
-   Humayun invaded Gujarat in 1535 and sacked Mandu but was defeated in Ahmedabad.
-   Champanir fort was captured and plundered.
-   Bahadur Shah was murdered in 1537. ^d7140e


### Humayun's defeat against Sher Shah
-   After BSoG's death the Afghans looked to Sher Shah for leadership.
-   Abul Fazl talks about H worries relating to Sher Khan. Who had captured Gaur in Bengal. 
-   H looked to SS as merely another Afghan chief but SS thought of himself as an independent ruler.
-   H wanted to capture Bengal due to its vast treasures and to try recreate the Delhi Sultanate. Plan was ill conceived 
-   Sher Shah's prestige had greatly increased after his victory in Surajgarh over Mahmud Shah of Bengal and earlier in 1532/33 over Nusrat Shah.
-   SS had captured Banaras, attacked Chuna, Jaunpur and Mughal forces at Kannauj and Sambhal.
- @  Humayun was defeated first at Battle of Chausa/Karmansa in June 1539 after Kamran had refused to help with troops and again at Kannauj May 1540.

#### Why did Humayun Lose?
-   hostility of his brothers especially Kamran and Askari Mirza.
-   Tactically inferior to Sher Shah. Underestimated Afghan Challenge who could unite under a capable leader. 
-   Lacked fiancial resources.
- Fractitius Nobles who did not want to serve areas away from Agra/Delhi.
---

-   Humayun was sheltered by Raja Maldeo and Rana Birsal before moving to Persia for Shah Tahmasp's help.
-   Humayun wrested Qandahar in 1544 and then Kabul w/ Shah's help. Which gained him the support of many nobles.
-   Kamran fled Kabul and was captured and blinded after repeated rebellions.
-   From Kabul he first captured Lahore and then Sirhind occupying Delhi in June 1555.
-   He died in Jan 26 1556.

## PYQs

**Mughal Empire, First phase: Babur and Humayun**

1. Write a short essay on: "The empire-builder in North India of the sixteenth century."
[1989, 20m]

2. Comment on the Turko-Mongol theory of sovereignty. To what extent was it adopted by Babur and Humayun? [2010, 30m]
-   Divine theory of Kingship, 
-   King paternalist figure, more than leader, absolute power, no religious/ sectarian bigotry, supernatural qualities ex Scourge of god, 
-   Timur religious - Genghis not, 
-   decentralisation of power later, Babur - Mongol descent, hereditary monarchy, 
-   state a family property, not follow division of empire. 
-   Humayun - claim divinity, was centre of world, justice, divided empire




