# Rajput Policy
2020-04-27 12:29 :43

```toc
```
---

- Turkish rulers wanted to reduce powers of local rulers/ rais. A Khalji was 1st seeking active alliance with local Rajas.
- Lodis too tried to establish friendly relations.
- Humayun tried to concilliate over the zamindars including Rajputs reportedly on the advice of Shah Tahmasp.

##  Matrimony
- Rajputs of Amber under Bharmal did not run away when Elephant he was riding went out of control. Ak married Bharmal's daughter.
- Allahabad Pillar of Samudragupta mentions that subordinate Rajas should send 1 daughter to imperial household -> practice was not new.
 - Also married Rukmavati a Rohila princess. 
 - Marriages were done due to special circustances ex procuring help against invastion.
 - Salim was son of a Kachhawahi princess. Daniyalwas sent to be brought up by wife of Raja Bharmal.
 - Realtions deepend w/ Rajputs only after fall of Chittor 1568 and capture of Ranthambore.  
 - Matrimonial relations became rare after Mewar submitted and alliance with Rajputs attained a measure of stability.

## Rajput Policy/ Relations with Rajputs
-   Satish Chandra has divided Ak evolution of Rajput policy into 3 main phases. 

###  1st Phase till 1572 
- Rajput rajas who submitted considered loyal allies and were expected to give military service around their principalities but not outside. 
- Ex. Man Singh did not take part in siege of Chittor, Bharmal and Bhagwant man were constant companion of Ak during Uzbek rebellion.

### 2nd Phase from Gujarat Campaign in 1572. 
- Man Singh was appointed to lead campaign outside. 
- Ak showed favour to the Kachhawahas . Rajputs of Ranthambore, Shekhawati Rajputs and Rajputs of Jodhpur played an imp role in this.
- Rajputs began to emerge as loyal sword-arm of the empire.
- in 1576 Man Singh was appointed to lead against Rana Pratap.

### The 3rd phase was from 1578 
- Man Singh and Bhagwant Das came to Punjab for campaign againt NW and Kashmir. This was the time when Akbar broke w/ orthodx clergy. 
- Badayuni called it a case of 'Hindu Wielding the sword of Islam'. 
- Rajputs emerged as parnters in the Kingdom and as counter to Turani nobles whom Ak could not trust due to his break w/ Ulama. 
- Adminsitrative duties were given to Baghwant Das. He was also asked to assist gov of Punjab -> rebellion in East joined by Clergy who proclaimed Mirza Hakim their ruler. 
- Rajputs were asked to fight against Mirza Hakim, Akbars half brother. He was ousted from Lahore and reinstated at Kabul. 
- Bhagwant Singh and Saeed Khan were appt joint governor of Lahore. Saeed was later transferred to Delhi.
-   Alliance was strengthened further through marriages. Later in the reign Rajput were given adminstrative duties, Man Singh was appointed governor of Bihar and Bengal.
-   Rajputs were appt as joint governors of 4 subah Lahore, Kabul, Agra, Ajmer as well as faujdars and commanders of forts.
-   It was a mutually beneficial alliance. Rajputs raised their prestige, was financially rewarding.
-   Princess of Jodhpur, Bikaner and Jaiselmer were married to Salim.
 - R were given broad autonomy over their own principalities. 

### Relations w/ Mewar
- Ak sent diplomatic missions to Mewar all of which failed since Rana refused his personal submission -> A could have used a more flexible policy.
- This was done after his conquest of Bihar and Bengal, estd a new adm machinery, and after defeating Chandrasen of Marwar.
- 1576 Ak moved to Ajmer against Rana Pratap and deputed Man Singh to lead a campaign against him.
- Rana Pratap used the scorched earth policy devastating entire region upto Chitthor. Rana also befriended Bhils.
- Bo Haldighati was fought in Feb 1576. Rana had the upper hand during the initial attack but a rumour of Ak arrival and arrival of Mughal reserves pushed Rana to retreat.
- It was a struggle for local independence not H-M struggle, or of Rajput independence.
- Ak then personally led campaign against Rana. He persuaded local rulers to join his campaign.
- Rebellion in Bengal, Bihar forced Ak to withdraw. Later he moved to Lahore to look into NW situation
- No expeditions againt Rana was carried who recovered some of his terrirotries except Chittor. He died in 1597.
- Mewar submitted during the Reign of Jahangir.

##  Certain other features that strengthened this alliance was
-   Religious independence to build temples, follow religious traditions especially to Rajput queens.
-   Honour defeated Rajput rulers by reinstating them.
-   Internal freedom/ autonomy in their kingdom. Eg Rajputs had their own system of revenue collection called rekha.
-   Abolition of Jiziya and respect for cow.


## PYQs


**Rajput policy**




1. Write a short essay on: "Rana Pratap's patriotism was his only offence." [1999, 20m]
-   **VA Smith said this, courage valour, did not bow down to Akbar, Haldighati defeat poisoned**


```ad-Answer

```



2. "Akbar built the Mughal Empire by enlisting the support Rajputs." Do you agree? [2003,
60m]
-   [divided into 3 main phases.](onenote: [[Rajput]] %20Policy&section-id={92783BDC-2B1C-4D6D-AAB2-18F724050976}&page-id={022E75DA-5EA3-45EB-9FBB-F5C4DDF00FAA}&object-id={1ED8BFD6-B6E3-44FC-AB84-526FD194DA41}&17&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Akbar.one )


```ad-Answer

```



3. Akbar built the Mughal Empire by enlisting the support of the Rajputs; Aurangzeb destroyed it by alienating the Rajputs." Discuss critically. [2007, 60m]
-   [divided into 3 main phases.](onenote: [[Rajput]] %20Policy&section-id={92783BDC-2B1C-4D6D-AAB2-18F724050976}&page-id={022E75DA-5EA3-45EB-9FBB-F5C4DDF00FAA}&object-id={1ED8BFD6-B6E3-44FC-AB84-526FD194DA41}&17&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Akbar.one )
-   [Aurangzeb :](onenote:Mughal%20Empire%20in%2017th%20Century. one #Religious %20policies%20of%20Jahangir,%20Shahjahan%20and%20Aurangzeb&section-id={28246277-2B89-4E79-8E90-9CF1B0AA2733}&page-id={5BE69AC7-2134-41FE-89C7-4637D4BC59D6}&object-id={13958D4B-1527-4107-B238-D54892E04C34}&27&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II )



```ad-Answer

```


4. Describe the Rajput policy of the Mughal emperors. Do you agree with the view that the reversal of Akbar's Rajput policy by Aurangzeb was responsible for the disintegration of the Mughal Empire? [2000, 60m]
-   [divided into 3 main phases.](onenote: [[Rajput]] %20Policy&section-id={92783BDC-2B1C-4D6D-AAB2-18F724050976}&page-id={022E75DA-5EA3-45EB-9FBB-F5C4DDF00FAA}&object-id={1ED8BFD6-B6E3-44FC-AB84-526FD194DA41}&17&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Akbar.one )
-   [Aurangzeb :](onenote:Mughal%20Empire%20in%2017th%20Century. one #Religious %20policies%20of%20Jahangir,%20Shahjahan%20and%20Aurangzeb&section-id={28246277-2B89-4E79-8E90-9CF1B0AA2733}&page-id={5BE69AC7-2134-41FE-89C7-4637D4BC59D6}&object-id={13958D4B-1527-4107-B238-D54892E04C34}&27&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II )


```ad-Answer

```



5. Do you think that Akbar's Rajput policy was a conscious attempt to incorporate the Indian ruling elite with the Mughal Imperial System? [2017, 15 Marks]
-   [divided into 3 main phases.](onenote: [[Rajput]] %20Policy&section-id={92783BDC-2B1C-4D6D-AAB2-18F724050976}&page-id={022E75DA-5EA3-45EB-9FBB-F5C4DDF00FAA}&object-id={1ED8BFD6-B6E3-44FC-AB84-526FD194DA41}&17&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Akbar.one )

```ad-Answer

```



