# Evolution of Religious and Social Outlook
2020-04-27 12:29 :51

```toc
```
---

-   Akbar took steps to create a better understanding of different religions.
-   He set up bureau to translate works in Sanskrit, Arabic, Greek etc into Persian. Some translations taken in were Singhasana Battisi, Nal Daman(poetic drama), Panch Tantra, Atharva Veda, Mahabharata, Ramayana and Gita. Christian Gospels were also translated. Kalhan's Rajtarangini, Bhaskaracharya's Lilawati were also translated into Persian.
-   Wine drinking was allowed if recommended by Doctors, prostitution was regulated, immoral trafficking was controlled, Widow remarriage was permitted, polygamy was prohibited except when childless, age of marriage was increased to 16 for boys and 14 for girls, Bureau for registration of Marriages, sati was prohibited except on consent.
-   Ban on sale and purchase of slaves.
-   Forcefully converted people to Islam could revert back to their original religion.
-   Building of temples and Churches were permitted.
-   Banned circumcision of boyts under 12 without consent and regulated the direction in which bodies were to be buried.
-   He revised educational syllabus, empahsised on Moral and Secular subjects like mathematics, astronomy, history, logic etc.
-   He gave court patronage to poets, musicians, artists, painters etc.
-   The society however was hierarchical and deeply traditional in nature.

## Evolution of a new state policy [^1]
- [x] #todo 
- His religious policy can be divided into his state policies and his personal ideas and beliefs.
- His state policy or social outlook in the field of religion was determined by Turko Mughal traditions and influenced by Hindu Muslim rapproachment done by Bhakti and Sufi saints.
- Hindi Bhakti songs were used widely in sama gatherings,

### The Mahzar and New State Policy
- Akbar issued it in 1579 it was a document signed by leading ulemas that gave him the power to interpret laws.
```ad-Views
**Vincent Smith** has said that it gave him the attributes of infallibility like that of Pope.

Others have said that it was done to free himself from Ottoman Khalifa

Some have justified the document but called it a document to grant Akbar unrestrained autocratic power.

```
- It declared him as Sultan of Islam, asylum of mankind, commander of the faithful and shadow of God over worlds.
- Was not new before him Balban and A Khalji had claimed the same.
- There was growing distrust on the Ulema due to their shallowness, bigotry and venality. They avoided paying taxes and abused their position by taking bribes.
- Various ulemas sides with the rebels in Bengal and Bihar in 1580 but were later captured and killed.

## Other measures of Social reforms
- Rent free land given as madad-i-mash were to consist 1/2 of tilled land and other as land fallow but capable of cultivation.
- Such grants were extended to non muslims and even rebels at times.
- 2 estd outside Fatehpur sikri called Dharmapura and Khairpura was made to feed needy and poor. Another called Jogipura was made later.
- A tried to make a state based on universal peace and justice having an inclusive nobility.
- He translated many works into Persian to estd new era of enquiry and research into religious matters.
- Badayuni has criticed the use of wine allowed to strengthen body if recommended by doctors.
- Prostitution was regulated, ordinance was passed to have only 1 wife, widow remarriage was permitted, marriage b/w cousins or near relations was banned.
- Sati was prohibited and a marriage bureau for their registration was set up.
- Sale and purchase of slaves was banned, slavery was prohibited.
- Revised education syllabus emphasising moral education and secular subjects such as mathematics, agriculture, geometry etc.

[^1]: Satish Chandra : Medieval India II