# Theory of Sulh-i-Kul and Religious Policy

2020-04-27 12:30 :04

```toc
```

---

## Religious Policy of Akbar

- Akbar's religious policy based on Turko-Mughal traditions, Hindu-Muslim rapprochment of Bhakti movement and his inquisitive mind.
- Abdul Latif his tutor was considered Sunni in Iran and Shia in India.

### Early Phase 1556-73

- forbade enslavement of wives and children of rebellious villagers,
- in 1563 he remitted pilgrim tax, married Rajput princes without converting them to Islam,
- Hindu court nobles were allowed idol worship,
- In 1564 he abolished Jiziya.
- During this period he was under the influence of the orthodox ulema viz Abdul Nabi, a persecuter of heretics, non-muslims and his opponents.
- He prayed daily, cleaned mosques and listened to the ulema's discourses on religion.

### Second Phase 1573-80

- marked by intense discussion and introspection on the part of Akbar and change in his religious views.
- Badayuni talks about him discussing on works of God, sufism, philosophy and law.
- In this background the Ibadat Khana was set up at Fatehpur Sikri in 1575.

#### Ibadat Khana and Other Religious Policies and Establishments

- Jews, Christians and Hindus, the Muslims, indulged in public arguments.
- At first it was only open to Muslims till 1578. It was closed in 1582.
- Ibadat Khana had 2 important consequences :
	- it convinced AKbar that all religions had elements of truth and all of them led to the same supreme reality → evolution of the concept of Sulh i Kul or peace b/w all religions.
	- 2nd it demonstrated the narrow mindedness of ulamas.
	- The concept of Justice was an integral part of Sulh i Kul #important
- Mahzar
	- attested document signed by 7 leading Ulemas and issued in 1579.
	- It allowed Akbar to interpret laws(Mujtahid). \
	- It declared him to be the Sultan of Islam and Shadow of God over worlds.
- Akbar built 2 establishment outside Fatehpur Sikri Dharmapura to feed Hindus and Khairpura to feed Muslims. Jogipura to feed jogis was also started.

### Third Phase 1581 - 1605

- His belief was in uncompromising monotheism, and communion with God was possible by turning oneself to him through meditation.
- deep faith in God, gave great respect to light(nur) reflected in Sun and Fire.
- $ Badayuni said that Akbar adopted Hindu practices like worshipping sun and fire, putting Tika on head, custom of Rakhi, banning animal slaughter.
- believed that all religions had fundamental element of truth but it was obscured by blind devotion to slavish imitations

#### Din-i-Ilahi

- Badayuni says that Akbar had established a new religion so does Monserrate.
- Untrue As it did not have priesthood, no rituals or beliefs, no books etc.
- Abul Fazl calls its Tauhid-i-Ilahi ie divine monotheism and links it to Akbar being spiritual guide of the people.
- Badayuni mentions the 4 degrees of faith in the emperor which were readiness to sacrifice property, life, honour and religion.
- He wrongly links it to Din i Ilahi as this practice was common with sufi saints.
- Rizvi sees this as an ideological force to unify new Mughal elite around the Mughal Throne.

> JF Richards thinks that discipleship was an effective means to assimilate heterogeneous body of nobles and bind them to the throne.

- Vincent Smith has called it as a monument of Akbars folly but this was not so.


## Implication of Theory of Sulh-I-Kul

- [x] #todo
 - Implication means conclusion that could be drawn, inference or the result.
 - Sulh I Kul means peace with all or universal tolerance.
 - Theory of Sulh-i-Kul did tremendous for the Hindu Muslim rapproachment and was aptly assisted by the works of various Bhati and Sufi saints.
 - Akbar was dissuaded from the funadamentalism of Ulemas and wanted to estd a state based on liberalism of religion and justice without bigotry. The Mahzar was also a step into this direction. His religious view did estd such a state under him.
 - It aided his vision to estd a strong political institution in a predominantly non muslim world. He had realised that oppression and orthodoxy were not the way ahead.
 - It allowed various non-muslims nobles to be appointed to high positions. No of non muslims in govt institutions increased.
 - Religious aids to various different non-muslim sects too inc whereas the beneficiaries early were mostly Muslims.
 - This religious tolerance made the Mughal empire center of world in matter of commerce and art only a few short decades later. Many religious and secular literature were translated into Persian and other languages.

### Religious Liberalism Example

 - Jain teachers such as Hiravijaya Suri, Vijayasena Suri, Jinachandra etc are said to have influenced him.
 - Parsis had impressed Akbar so much that per Badayuni he ordered Abul Fazl to make arrangements for their sacred fire to be kept burning at the court at all the hours.

## Catholicity of His Reign

- [x] #todo
- Catholicity means in being with conformity with the Catholic church.
- Saint Thomas the Apostle was perhaps the first christian reformer to have visited India.
- The process of Chritian evangelism was accelerated after Vasco Da Gama's landing at the port of Calicut.
- His religous inquisitveness led to many Catholic priests into his court. Which also aided his search for truth that he believed was there in every religious teachings.
- He invited Father Rudolfo Aquaviva, Father Antonio Monserrate and Father Francois Henriques to Agra in 1580 to learn about Christianity and satify his philosophical desires of searching the truth.
- @ **Vincent Smith** has wrongly implied that Christians of the court made him renounce the Muslim religion.
- It led to the establishment of Akbars Church at Agra in 1600.
- The Jesuit priests also brough pieces of Art and a translated Bible with them. Court painters were inspired by them and produced works that was influenced by it.

## PYQs

**Evolution of religious and social outlook, theory of Sulh-i-kul and religious policy**

1. What motivated Akbar to enunciate Din-i-Ilahi? How far did he succeed in spreading it?
[1983, 20m]
- [Akbar's religious - based on Turko-Mughal traditions, Hindu](onenote: [[Theory]] %20of%20Sulh-i-Kul%20and%20Religious%20Policy&section-id={92783BDC-2B1C-4D6D-AAB2-18F724050976}&page-id={EF4226BD-0B85-4F97-B86E-EEF8A4AF2191}&object-id={DFF3DAE9-336C-4D9A-886D-C79BF7AC1353}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Akbar.one> )

```ad-Answer

```

1. "In medieval Indian history Akbar is unique for his religio-political ideas and policies." Discuss the statement and compare Akbar with Sher Shah in regard to their administrative policies and revenue administration. [1990, 60m]
- [Akbar's religious - based on Turko-Mughal traditions, Hindu](onenote: [[Theory]] %20of%20Sulh-i-Kul%20and%20Religious%20Policy&section-id={92783BDC-2B1C-4D6D-AAB2-18F724050976}&page-id={EF4226BD-0B85-4F97-B86E-EEF8A4AF2191}&object-id={DFF3DAE9-336C-4D9A-886D-C79BF7AC1353}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Akbar.one> )
- Akbar's Administration -
- Sher Shah's Administration -

```ad-Answer

```

1. Highlight the catholicity of Akbar's regime with suitable examples. [1997, 60m]
- [Catholicity of his reign](onenote: [[Theory]] %20of%20Sulh-i-Kul%20and%20Religious%20Policy&section-id={92783BDC-2B1C-4D6D-AAB2-18F724050976}&page-id={EF4226BD-0B85-4F97-B86E-EEF8A4AF2191}&object-id={64E96051-EEA8-445C-A9F3-29A40BF9E897}&13&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Akbar.one> )

```ad-Answer

```

1. Trace the evolution of the religious views of Akbar. Write a note on his policy of Sulh-I kul. [2002, 60m]
- [Akbar's religious - based on Turko-Mughal traditions, Hindu](onenote: [[Theory]] %20of%20Sulh-i-Kul%20and%20Religious%20Policy&section-id={92783BDC-2B1C-4D6D-AAB2-18F724050976}&page-id={EF4226BD-0B85-4F97-B86E-EEF8A4AF2191}&object-id={DFF3DAE9-336C-4D9A-886D-C79BF7AC1353}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Akbar.one> )

```ad-Answer

```

1. Was Din-i-Ilahi 'a monument of Akbar's folly'? [2004, 20m]
- **Personality cult, mem hand-picked, Jesuit missionary did not like**
- **VA Smith - growth of unrestrained autocracy, monument of his folly, silly invention**
- **Not folly - Badaouni's evidence are biased, Bhagwan Das Man Singh did not join, no attempt to separate it from Islam, was political necessity, new social order, bridge diff b/w religion,**

```ad-Answer

```

6. Write a short essay on: "Religious tolerance of Akbar." [2006, 20m]
- [Akbar's religious - based on Turko-Mughal traditions, Hindu](onenote: [[Theory]] %20of%20Sulh-i-Kul%20and%20Religious%20Policy&section-id={92783BDC-2B1C-4D6D-AAB2-18F724050976}&page-id={EF4226BD-0B85-4F97-B86E-EEF8A4AF2191}&object-id={DFF3DAE9-336C-4D9A-886D-C79BF7AC1353}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Akbar.one> )

```ad-Answer

```

1. "In medieval Indian history Akbar was unique for his religio-political ideas and policies." Analyse this statement. [2015, 15m]
- [Akbar's religious - based on Turko-Mughal traditions, Hindu](onenote: [[Theory]] %20of%20Sulh-i-Kul%20and%20Religious%20Policy&section-id={92783BDC-2B1C-4D6D-AAB2-18F724050976}&page-id={EF4226BD-0B85-4F97-B86E-EEF8A4AF2191}&object-id={DFF3DAE9-336C-4D9A-886D-C79BF7AC1353}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Akbar.one> )

```ad-Answer

```

1. Write a short Essay on: "Implications of Akbar's notion of Sulh-i-kul." [2009, 20m]
- [Implication of theory of Sulh I Kul](onenote: [[Theory]] %20of%20Sulh-i-Kul%20and%20Religious%20Policy&section-id={92783BDC-2B1C-4D6D-AAB2-18F724050976}&page-id={EF4226BD-0B85-4F97-B86E-EEF8A4AF2191}&object-id={64E96051-EEA8-445C-A9F3-29A40BF9E897}&B&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Akbar.one> )

```ad-Answer

```

1. "Akbar wished to assert his strong belief in God, but his concept of the way God is to be worshipped was independent of either orthodox Islam or Hindustan." Comment. [2018, 10
Marks]
- [Akbar's religious - based on Turko-Mughal traditions, Hindu](onenote: [[07 GS-4/1. Human-Values/PYQ]] &section-id={92783BDC-2B1C-4D6D-AAB2-18F724050976}&page-id={582B277E-3381-4D32-BAE2-4FA910F69E55}&object-id={88568DF1-63BC-4170-9F61-36C538D53F1E}&3C&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Akbar.one> )

```ad-Answer

```
