# Peasant Movement of 1920s and 1930s

2020-04-27 15:13 :04

```toc
```

---

## Kisan Sabha Movement Was

- against the tilling of Bedakhali land, Begar and Hari which were forms of unpaid labour.
- Rai Bareilly, Faizabad, Sultanpur, Pratapgarh.
- declined after gov repression and passing of **Awadh Rent Amendment Act**.
- Nazarana was a type of renewal fees.
- The initial organisation of Peasants into Kisan Sabha was taken by Home Rule leaguers. UP Kisan sabha was formed in 1918.
- Baba Ramchandra became the rallying point for the peasants against the condition of the tenants, asked Jawaharlal Nehru to visit rural areas of UP.
- The NCN and congress workers found an alternative called the Oudh Kisan Sabha

## Eka Movement

 - started in 1921 in districts of Hardoi, Bahraich and Sitapur of United Provinces/Awadh.
- against high rents, opression of thikadars and share rents.
- Leadership was provided by **Madari and Pasi** caste leaders.
- died down after sever repression from gov.
- It also had small zamindars participate in them


## Telangana Movement

- was a **guerrilla** movt.
- led by the **communists** against the Ruling elites of Hyderabad 1946-1951, women part, Nari Bahini
- Peasants organised themselves into **village sanghams**.

## No Tax Movt of Bardoli or Bardoli Satyagraha 1928

- It was in many ways a child of the NCM.
- supposed to be the place of beginning of the CDM due to which it had undergone intense politicization.
- Kaliparaj were people form the lower rungs and Ujaliparaj from the higher ones.
- Certain new actions were taken to develop a Kaliparaj literature, Bhajan Mandalis were formed, schools were formed for teaching the children of the Kaliparaj community.
- took measures to curb the unjustified increase in land revenue.
- Bardoli committee was set up to look into this by the Congress.
- Vallabhai undertook a Satyagrah there after the moderate's methods had failed to bring any positive change.
- Prior to this he had organised and led the people in Kheda, Nagpur and Borsad Satyagrahs.
- divided the people into Chhavanis under a leader and formed a volunteer corp. A publication called Patrika was set up.
- Mobilisation was done through meetings, door to door persuasion, pamphlets, speeches etc. Special emphasis was on women mobilisation.
- Social boycott was threatened to those who did not cooperate.
- Later an official enquiry was done and the enhancement was found to be unjustified.

---
- Kisan Sabha Movt in Bihar Swami Sahajanand Saraswati 1929 formed Bihar provincial Kisan Sabha BPKS
- Against zamindari attacks, occupancy rights
- Initial promote class harmony but 1933 onwards escalating landlord tenant friction
- Socialist influence, middle poor peasant part
- NG Ranga peasant marches + EMS Namboodripad Madras - South IN Fed of Peasants
- Orissa - Utkal Kisan Sangha
- All IN Kisan Sabha 1936 Sahjanand Saraswati 1st Prez, abolition of Z, graduated IN tax on agri income, granting occupancy rights to all tenants, scaling down interest rates and debts
- Militant movt for restoration of Bakasht land 1938-39 Bihar - gaya dist
- UP Kisan Sabha under Narendra Dev, Mohan Lal Gautam against INC ministry
- Orissa INC pro landlord amendment - Kisan day rally
- Right wing inc since 1937 Ian Copland - they began to dream of power at federal centre
- Escalation of popular agitation in princely states, MG led in Rajko

## PYQs

---

**The peasant movements of the 1920s and 1930s**

1. Write a brief essay on the peasant movement in India between 1921 and 1947. [1980, 60m]
- [Peasant Movement of 1920s and 1930s](onenote: [[Peasant]] %20Movement%20of%201920s%20and%201930s&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={93C9985C-E419-4996-84DE-40DCB2F59D85}&end&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )

1. Analyze the nature of peasant movements during the nationalist phase and bring out their shortcomings. [2015, 20m]
- [peasants emerged as the main force in agrarian movements as](onenote: [[Shift]] %20in%20character%20of%20Peasant%20move%20post%201857&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={8A3F3C2A-9412-4661-8722-9B8A3A83E350}&object-id={4A761B72-B9F9-42D9-81FE-FD4D603B0107}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )

1. Discuss the nature of peasant movements under the Kisan Sabhas during 1920-1940.
[2017, 10m]
- [Kisan Sabha Movement was](onenote: [[Peasant]] %20Movement%20of%201920s%20and%201930s&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={93C9985C-E419-4996-84DE-40DCB2F59D85}&object-id={836D2D5E-BF8E-4753-BBA8-EC356EBE44D5}&C&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
- [Kisan Sabha Movt in Bihar Swami Sahajanand Saraswati 1929 formed](onenote: [[Peasant]] %20Movement%20of%201920s%20and%201930s&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={93C9985C-E419-4996-84DE-40DCB2F59D85}&object-id={5FF95466-7C3C-47F0-876E-21196DD404F3}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
