# Shift in Character of Peasant Move post 1857

2020-04-27 15:12:41

---

- peasants emerged as the main force in agrarian movements as against Princes, Chiefs and landlords.
- demands almost wholly on economic issues and against their immediate enemy.
- Colonialism not target.
- Territorial reach limited.
- Lacked continuity of struggle/ long term organisation
- instinctive and spontaneous response to its social condition marked by excessive exploitation and oppression.
- was moved by strong notions of legitimacy of what was justifiable and what was not
- developed a strong awareness of legal rights and asserted them in and outside the courts.
- great courage and a spirit of sacrifice, remarkable organizational abilities, solidarity cutting across religion and caste lines.
- considerable concession from the state. state contempt as uprising not against the rule itself.
- major weakness of the 19th century peasant movements was the lack of an adequate understanding of colonialism it was within the conformities of the old social order.
- They lacked a positive conception of an alternative society to unite the people against a common struggle.
- Greater awareness of colonial policies ex Pabna Agrarian Revolt
- middle class their spokesman
- Hindoo Patriot, Amrita Bazar Patrika took pro landlord stance
- Ranajit Guha - Peasant movt should not be looked as pre history of freedom mvt as they have history of their own

## PYQs

---

1. Identify the various forms of 'rural protest' in India in the second half of the nineteenth century. Were they expressions of anti-landlord or anti-foreign discontent? [1987, 60m]
- [Civil Rebellion :](onenote: [[Peasant]] %20Movements%20and%20Tribal%20Uprisings%20in%20the%2018th%20and%2019th%20Century&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={B8CE06D5-BF12-4DA2-97F1-863C2D9AE7E6}&object-id={5492818D-F02A-4503-B9E0-0604FDFFF226}&38&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
- [Pabna Agrarian Crisis (1870s and 1880s) :](onenote: [[Peasant]] %20Movements%20and%20Tribal%20Uprisings%20in%20the%2018th%20and%2019th%20Century&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={B8CE06D5-BF12-4DA2-97F1-863C2D9AE7E6}&object-id={9401C94D-ABB4-47D5-8C66-87CD380D4147}&2B&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )

2."The peasant movements of the second half of the nineteenth century lacked a positive conception which would unite the people in a common struggle on a wide regional and allIndia plane and help develop long-term political developments." Critically evaluate. [2012,
10m]

- [peasants emerged as the main force in agrarian movements as](onenote: [[Shift]] %20in%20character%20of%20Peasant%20move%20post%201857&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={8A3F3C2A-9412-4661-8722-9B8A3A83E350}&object-id={4A761B72-B9F9-42D9-81FE-FD4D603B0107}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
