# CA : Indian Constitution, Devolution etc
2019-04-28 09:11:37
```toc
```
---

## CA : Novemeber 2021 Onwards
2020-03-10 12:52:42
            
---
- **Defamation** is a false statement that harms reputation of a person, business group etc. It can be both a civil and a criminal offence section 499 of the IPC deals with both of them. Has been misused for harassment, impinges into Art 19, coerce media and political opponents.
- **CP Joshi** #committee 2019 formed to examine role of speaker in cases of disqualification under 10th schedule. Recom : disq by the party and not by speaker.
- **Mahajan** #Committee was formed to solve the Belgaum dispute b/w Karnataka and Maharashtra. Maha did not agree w/  the recom of the reports.
- Judiciaries Efforts during pandemic : e-filing and artificial intelligence enabled referencing; e-courts projects seeks to address judiciary's digital deprivation. 
- **Criminal Justice reforms** : delay in disposal of cases leading to human rights violations of under trials and convicts; conviction orders are taking years to implement. 
	- Reforms req :  Fast Track Courts for certain offences, digitisation of documents, construction of new offences, classification of offences must be done in manner conducive to mgt of crimes.
 - PRS Legislative Research report says that during 15th LS 16% of its time was spent on disruptions. RS Lost 36% of its time. 
	 - Need : curb disorder in Parliament through strict enforcement of code of conduct. Productivity meter be created to check no of hours wasted.
 -  Art 25 (1) ie freedom of religion is a negative liberty where state shall make sure that there is no interference or obstacle to exervising this freedom.
	 - **Shirur Mutt case** doctrine of essentiality -> all essential rituals and practices would constitute a religion
	 - Charles Taylor : Positive liberty is the ability to fulfill one's purposes Negative liberty is the freedom from interference by others.
 -  


## CA April 2019 - October 2021
2021-09-06 16:44

---
-   Special category state recom 1st by **Gadgil** #committee. After the 14th Fin commission report it was removed against 42% devolution to states. Under it 90: 10.
-   ISRWD #Act 1956 : Act allows centre to set up an ad hoc tribunal for adjudication of dispute b/w 2 or more states. ==no time limit== for redressal, no common forum for discussion; Article 262 mentions redressal of disputes b/w states + union.
	- River Boards Act 1956 provides for the std of river boards for regulation and dev of inter state river and river valleys. Estd on request of state govt concerned. 
-   51A mentions respecting nat flag
-   [125th amendment bill](http://prsindia.org/billtrack/constitution-one-hundred-and-twenty-fifth-amendment-bill-2019) : financial and devolution of powers to autonomous councils under 5th schedule
-   Kerala HC says access to internet is a fundamental right under Right to education Art. 21A; similar stance as UN HRC's statement in 2016. SC says it is FR under Art 19 - freedom of speech.
- **Dinesh Goswami** #Committee led to addition of following items to 10th schedule. 10th schedule was based on recommmendation of YB Chavan Committee. 
	- Voluntary rejection of membership
	- not voting per party directions -> disqulaification. 
- **Law Commission 170th** #report said to exempt merger/split from disq criteria. 
	-   Pre-poll electoral front under anti-defection.
	-   limit issuance of whip only when gov is in danger;
	-   decision under 10th schedule in binding on the Prez/Gov
-   MP/MLA can be disq under ==Art 102/Art 191== for holding office of profit, unsound mind, undischarged insolvent, not IN citizen
-   Krishna water dispute : Maha, Karnataka and AP. Current dispute is AP is asking newely formed Telangana to be included in the water sharing deal as a separate entity.
-   Sedition #Act 124A of IPC :  seen as restriction to Freedom of expression.
	- **KedarNath Singh** Case upheld its validity but laid down certain rules; **Balwant Singh vs So Punjab**  Case said merely shouting slogan is not sedition 
	- According to NCRB max number of sedition cases are from Assam and Jharkhand.
	- Need : make bailable, non-cognisable, raise the burden of proof, no malicious complaints.
-   IPC introduced in 1860 put forward by **Macaulay** replaced Mohammedan Criminal Law. Need - re-examine Sedition law, remove Blasphemy laws 295A, Criminal conspiracy, Section 149 on unlawful assembly, Section 377 etc
-   CAA amends the Citizenship #Act 1955 to grant citizenship to ==6 minority communities== from AFG, BAN, PAK after 6 years of stay in IN. OCI cardholders registration may be cancelled if they violate any law.
-   Impeachment of US prez **House of Rep** has sole power of impeachment while Senate the Upper House has sole power to try all impeachments
-   Gods, Corporations, rivers, animals - Juristic person only after consecration (Yogendra Nath case). Deities can ==own property, pay taxes, sue and being sued, do not have fundamental/ constitutional rights==. SGPC vs Somnath Das Case 2000, Dakor Temple Case 1887. ^7c7221
-   **Ayodhya dispute** : Article 142 invoked, travellers quoted were from Tieffenthaler 18th century missionary, William finch, Montgomery Martin - civil servant.
-   Sabarimaala Verdict. Challenges : probing essential religious practices, against article 26, permissible extent of judicial intervention in religious practices.
-   SL has a semi presidential system. Prez holds exec powers governs w/ a PM.
-   Savmidhan Divas on 26th Nov
-   Creamy layer principle in SC ST quota for promotion :
    -   Background : Centre and State was giving SC STs reservation in promotions, **Indra Sawhney case** SC said it was unconstitutional, Parliament brought the **77th amendment** to reserved seats in promotion if community was not adequately represented. 
    - In **M Nagaraj case** SC held its constitutionality by said that 3 criteria needs to be satisfied community should be socially educationally backward, not adequately rep and the policy should not affect overall efficiency in admn. New 2018 7 judge bench is the above case.
    -   Centre asked SC in **J Singh vs LN Gupta** case court agreed that creamy layer applied to SC ST in order to prevent misuse of reservation, upheld M Nagaraja verdict.
    -   **Art 335** recognises special needs to be adopted for considering claims of SC and ST
-   Anglo Indian reservation in LS and SLA removed 104th CAA. **Art 334** provided for reservation of seat for Anglo Indian Community. Father or any male line needs to be of European descent
-   Art 81 of Const defines house shall not consist of more than 550 elected mem including 20 from UT. Need for more seats : Every MP currently represents 16-18 lakh people, removing anglo IN reservation seat now only 543, seats have not been revised even after creation of states like UKD, ARUN leg assembly for DEL, PON
-   SC said -> gov aided Minority Educational Insititutions MEIs in deciding appointment of teachers does not violate Art 30. Special Rights enjoyed by them - ==compensation if property taken by state RTE== is a fundamental right; they are ==not considered for reservation==, Under RTE MEIs are not required to provide 25% reservation for children(6-14); MEIs can have 50% seat reserved for minorities; can have separate admission process but it should be fair and cannot charge capitation fees.
-   **Tulu** is a language spoken in Dakshin Kannada/ Mangaluru area, Udupi in KTAKA and Kasargod in Kerala.
-   Conditions for Curative Petitions are : Genuine violation of natural justice, Judge bias. Specifically mention the view taken on review petition, be sent to 3 senior most judges and earlier ones, penalty if case lacks merit. **Roopa Hurra vs Ashok Hurra** case.
-   SC said that ==Right to Private property is a human right== and state cannot tresspass into it and them claim ownership of the name of adverse possession
-   Under **Article 131** SC has original jurisdiction to deal w/ State Centre dispute. To qualify as a dispute under 131 it has to necessarily be b/w states and centre and involve question of law. **Article 143** is about advisory jurisdiction
-   SC said - **Permanent Tribunal** headed by retired SC judge hear cases of MLA/MP disqualification, except for exceptional circumstances petitions decided by Speaker in 3 months.
-   1966 division Haryana, Punjab opposed sharing waters of Ravi and Beas, 1976 centre allocated 3.5 million acre feet MAF to HAR out of 7.2 MAF, Eradi tribunal inc it to 3.83 MAF
-   Prez addresses joint sitting of Parl at start '**Motion of Thanks**' give account of legislative and policy achievements of the gov. Amendments can be brought in by members, if it fails to pass gov will dissolve.
-   SC said that ==**Reservation in promotion** is not a fundamental right== and cannot be claimed by an individual. Art 16 only empowers the state to make reservation in matters of appointment and promotion. 
-   **Article 22 (1)** fundamental right to be defended by a legal practitioner.
-   Speaker of LS can suspend MPs but he can be un-suspended only after a motion is passed by the house
-   **Composite floor test** : more than one person claims to form the govt and majority is not clear
-   **Excise duty** of liquor is levied by states, does not come under GST, also land, electricity and petroleum products viz diesel, aviation turbine fuel.
-   SC held that Co-operative banks come under **SARFAESI** act
-   **Rule of Law index** by World Justice Project, IN ranked 69 #report 
-   Inclusion of state in **6th schedule** will enable the state to own legitimate ownership rights ==over its natural resource== help make it self-sufficient. 
	- It safeguards the rights of tribals through formation of **Autonomous District Council ADC**, special provisions under Art 244 and Art 275.
    -  **ADC** has ==30 mem, 4 are nominated by the Gov rest elected on basis of adult franchise==, every autonomous region has a separate regional council. #important 
-   Aided School teachers cannot become legislators, participate in politics would affect quality of education
-   New OCI card will not be required to register OCI every time new passport is issued
-   **Plenary Jurisdiction** : have complete authority or absolute power to take action on a particular issue w/o limitations. Art 142 allows the enforcement of decrees and orders. 
-   **Govt of NCT 2021 Amendment** #Act #important  : Govt means the Lt Gov of Delhi, gives ==discretionary powers to LG in matters where SLA can make laws==, LG be necessarily granted opportunity to give opinion before decision of Delhi Cabinet.
- **Indra Sawhney** case : 
	1. criteria for group to qualify for reservation is "social and educational backwardness".
	2. 50% limit to vertical quotas to ensure efficiency in administration can be exceeded in exceptional circumstannces
	3. 50% reservation is constitutionally recognised by 91st CAA.
	4. 102nd CAA 2018 added 338B, which deals with the structure, duties and powers of NCBC, and 342A that deals with powers of Prez to notify a particular caste as SEBC and the power of Parliament to change the list. Article 366 (26C) defines SEBCs. 
- Union word was 1st used offially in 1946. 
- **Delimitation Comm** as per 2002 #act will have 3 mem : serving or retired judge of SC as chair, CEC or EC nominated by Election Comm and SEC as ex-officio members.
- SC passed order that working of cooperative within a state is under State list and parliament cannot make laws on it. It upheld 97th CAA but struck down a part of it.
- ==**Speedy trial** is a fundamental right== : HC of Bombay said in Bhima Koregaon case.
- Constitution does not define the criteria for recognition of Schedules tribes. Art 366 only provides process to define scheduled tribes. President after consultation with Governor in case of states notifies ST/SC.
- **105th CAA** amends Art 342A that allows states and UTs to prepare their own OBC/SEBC list. Centre will also maintain a list.
- National Flag was adopted on *July22 1947* based on Swaraj flag made by Pingali Venkayya. **51A(a)** deals w/ respecting Constitutional ideals and institutions. Flag Code 2002 says should be hand spun.
- ==**Right to be forgotten** falls under RT Privacy== Art 21. RTP is governed by the Personal Data Protection bill which talks about Right to be forgotten. Cocern is that bill provides for determination of data being personal or not on Data Protection Authority not on individual.
- **Externment Order** prevents the movt of a person in certain cases. Can be granted to maintain law and order and also to protect interest of ST(Dhan Bahadur Ghorti Case).
- **Art 129** says <u>courts can initiate contempt on</u> its own. **Art 142** grants the courts power to punish for contempt and the ==Contempt of Courts Act 1971 was passed which defines civil and criminal contempt==. 
	- Consent of Attorney General is required to initiate contempt proceedings to save time from frivolous petitions.
	- When court itself initiates a contempt proceeding consent of AG not mandatory
- Renunciation of Indian citizenship was made easier. Provision was simplified to end within 60days, Mandatory to indicate reason for renouncing. 



---

# Static - Historical Underpinnings, Evolution
2020-10-21 16:58:29
            
---


-   Refer history notes for pre independence legislations
-   Objectives resolution - laid down fundamentals and philosophy of constitution
-   Criticism of CA - Not rep body, not sovereign body, Time consuming, Congress Dominated, Lawyer Politician Domination, Hindu dominated
-   Changes to CA by Independence Act - made it sovereign body, added legislative fn, ML members withdrew. Ratified IN membership of commonwealth
-   Imp Committees - Union Powers, Union Constitution, Provincial Constitution, Drafting Com, Advisory Com on FR Minorities etc, Rules of procedure, States Comm - Nehru, Steering Comm
-   Experts Comm made draft of Objectives Res


Enactment and Enforcement

[[1 - Historical Background.pdf]]


[[2 - Making of the Constitution.pdf]]



# Features
2020-10-21 16:59:23
            
---


-   Lengthiest written - now has 420 Art, Various Sources, Blend Rigidity and Flexibility, Federal Sys w/ Unitary Bias, Parliamentary Form, Synthesis of Parliamentary Sovereignty and Judicial Supremacy, Integrated and Independent Judiciary, FRs - political demo, DPSPs, FDs - 42 CAA 86 CAA, Secular State, Universal Adult Franchise, Single Citizenship, Independent Bodies - ECI CAG UPSC SPSC, Emergency Provisions, 3 tier of Govt, Co-op Societies - 97 CAA,
 

-   Criticism - Borrowed, Carbon copy of 1935 Act, Anti-Indian, Un Gandhian, Elephantine Size, Paradise for lawyers
![2. 3. 4. Sources Government of India Act of 1935 British Constitution US Constitution Irish Constitution Features Borrowed Federal Scheme, Office of governor, Judiciary, Public Service Commissions, Emergency provisions and administrative details. Parliamentary government, Rule of Law, legislative procedure, single citizenship, cabinet system, prerogative writs, parliamentary privileges and bicameralism. Fundamental rights, independence of judiciary, judicial review, impeachment of the president, removal of Supreme Court and high court judges and post of vice- president. Directive Principles of State Policy, nomination of members to Rajya Sabha and method of election of president. ](Features-image1-23202529.png)
 

![5. 6. 7. 8. 10. 11. Canadian Constitution Australian Constitution Weimar Constitution of Germany Soviet Constitution (USSR, now Russia) French Constitution South African Constitution Japanese Constitution Federation with a strong Centre, vesting of residuary powers in the Centre, appointment of state governors by the Centre, and advisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. Concurrent List, freedom of trade, commerce and inter-course, and joint sitting of the two Houses of Parliament Suspension of Fundamental Rights during Emergency. Fundamental duties and the ideal of justice (social, economic and political) in the Preamble. Republic and the ideals of liberty, equality and fraternity in the Preamble. Procedure for amendment of the Constitution and election of members of Rajya Sabha_ Procedure established by Law ](Features-image2-23202529.png)


[[3 - Salient Features of the Constitution.pdf]]


# Amendments
2020-10-21 16:59:31
            
---


-   Refer Anki
-   7 CAA - States Reorganisation Act, amended Schedules 2 and 7
-   25 CAA - Art 31C added gave primacy to DPSP 39b 39c over FR 14, 19 and 31
-   26 CAA - abolished Privy Purses
-   38 CAA - decl of emergency by Prez, promulgation of Ordinances as non-justiciable, P can declare national emergency on diff grounds simultaneously
-   51 CAA - amended Art 330 - 332 provide reservation for ST from Arunachal, Meg, Miz in LS
-   65 CAA - constitution of NCSC NCST consist of Chair, Vice Chair, 5 other mem
-   77 CAA - added 4a to Art 16 states make provision for reservation in promotion in Gov jobs for SC STs to nullify Indra Sawhney judgment on Mondal commission
-   85 CAA - consequential seniority in case of promotion of SC ST by reservation
-   89 CAA - NCSC and NCST established


Diff types of Amend



[[10 - Amendment of the Constitution.pdf]]



# Significant Provisions 
2020-10-21 16:59:41
            
---


## Preamble
-   Justice social, economic political
-   Liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship
-   Equality of status and opportunity
-   Fraternity assuring dignity, Unity integrity of nation
-   Source of Authority, gives nature of IN state, tell objectives
-   Berubari Union case - shows general purpose behind consti, are minds to makers of const, Not part
-   K Bharti case - is part, extreme importance, const should be read in light of noble vision in Preamble, can be amended subject to basic feature doctrine
-   LIC of India case 1995 - Preamble integral part
-   Non justiciable, Neither a source nor prohibition of power of legislature

[[4 - Preamble of the Constitution.pdf]]



## FRs

[[7 - Fundamental Rights.pdf]]



## DPSP

[[8 - DPSP.pdf]]





## Judicial Review
-   Art 141 binding, Art

[[27 - Judicial Review.pdf]]



## Universal Adult Franchise
[[3 - Salient Features of the Constitution.pdf#page=9]]



## Citizenship (part II Art 5-11)
-   Rights privileges to Citizens of India - Art 15, 16, 19, 29, 30
-   Citizenship act 1955 provides acquisition and loss of Citizenship : By Birth 1950-1987-2004, By Descent - 1950-1992-2004(unless birth registered within 1 yr), By Registration, By Naturalisation, incorporation of territory, Persons covered by Assam Accord - before-1966-1971-after
-   Loss by Renunciation- can be withheld during war, Termination - voluntary acquisition during war not applies, Deprivation - obtained through fraud, disloyalty, traded w/ enemy during war
-   Single Citizenship - Exceptions to general rule of absence of discrimination
    -   Parliament can prescribe residence condition for employment,
    -   Special benefits under Art 15 that do not cover race, religion, caste, sex and place of birth
    -   Freedom of movt subject to protection of STs
-   LM Singhvi comm - overseas citizenship of India
 
[[6 - Citizenship.pdf]]


## Separation of Powers
-   


# Basic Structure
2020-10-24 09:52:04
            
---


-   Shankari Prasad Case 1951 - on 1st CAA power to amend const includes FR -
-   Golaknath Case on 17th CAA cannot amend FR are transcendental and immutable -
-   24th CAA passed by parliament can take away FR under 368 -
-   K Barati case 1973 -
-   reaffirmed in Indira Nehru Gandhi Case(election of PM, Speaker out of purview of SC)
-   42nd CAA no limitation on the constituent power of parliament + no amendment can be questioned in any court
-   Minnerva Mills case - parliament cannot amend itself under Art 368 to give unlimited powers, Judicial review a basic structure
-   Waman Rao case - adhered to BS doctrine, date fixed as Arl 24 1973
-   Elements are Supremacy of const, Sovereign, Demo, Republican, Secular Character, Free fair election, Sep of powers, Fed char of const, Welfare state, Judicial review, principles of equality, Rule of law, Independence of Judiciary etc


[[11 - Basic Structure of the Constitution.pdf]]

# comparison of IN consti w/ other countries Parliament and State Legislature - Structure, functioning, conduct of Business, powers and privileges and issues arising out of these
2020-10-21 17:04:41
            
---


|     BR Consti                                                                                                                                  |     IN Const                                                      |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
|     Unwritten                                                                                                                                  |     written                                                       |
|     Evolutionary                                                                                                                               |     Open to evolution                                             |
|     Flexible                                                                                                                                   |     Blended                                                       |
|     Unitary                                                                                                                                    |     Federal                                                       |
|     Parliamentary Exec                                                                                                                         |                                                                   |
|     Parliament is   Sovereign- courts cannot question                                                                                          |     Courts can declare   ultra vires legislative measures         |
|     Unwritten Rules   like Queen can refuse assent but doesn't do so                                                                           |     Not there                                                     |
|     Rule of Law,   Independence of Judiciary                                                                                                   |                                                                   |
|     Monarcy, absolute   immunity                                                                                                               |     Republic                                                      |
|     PM has to be mem   of Lower House, has Privy Council,                                                                                      |                                                                   |
|     Judiciary cannot   strike down legislative act     Highest   interpreter, actions of exec can be declare ultra vires, judicial activism    |     Evolved Basic   Structure           Same w/ IN   Judiciary    |
 

 

| US Const                                                                                                           | IN Const               |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ---------------------- |
| Among the shortest                                                                                                 |                        |
| Very Rigid                                                                                                         |                        |
| Dual Citizenship                                                                                                   |                        |
| Truly Federal                                                                                                      | Quasi Fed              |
| Dual Federation - C S completely independent,                                                                      | Depends on one another |
| symmetrical federalism                                                                                             | Assymmetrical fed      |
| Presidential form, 4 yr term, not accountable, max 2 terms, only natural born, through Electoral College           | Parliamentary          |
| Impeachment - passed by 2/3rd majority, senate investigate, only be removed if 2/3 mem of senate pass a resolution |                        |
| Bill introduced and directly sent to committee                                                                     | Sent after 1st reading |
 

 

| CN Const                                                                               | IN Const |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| Socialist, CCP - democratic centralism principle                                       |          |
| Peoples Democratic Dictatorship, closely related to USSRs consti                       |          |
| Strong Central Govt, one party sys,                                                    |          |
| National People's Congress NPC is theoretically top decision making body 5 yr duration |          |
| Standing Committee of Congress is in practice most powerful headed by Chairman         |          |
| State council headed by Premier                                                        |          |
| Committed Judiciary - to socialism, conventional, quasi-judicial enforcement           |          |
| FRs and FDs                                                                            |          |
| Mao, Lenin, Marx ideologues                                                            |          |
 





| French Const                                                                                                              | IN Const |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| Unitary, Semi presidential                                                                                                |          |
| Fr parliament does not have supremacy in law making, a list for which legislature can make laws                           |          |
| Principles of Executive Supremacy, Strong Prez fixed term, PM subordinate to the Prez, Cohabitation, PM can elect cabinet |          |
| Emergency gives unlimited power to Prez makes him a dictator, can dissolve Assembly at most 2x a year,                    |          |
| Amendment is Rigid, Referendum by Prez                                                                                    |          |
 

 

| German Cosnt                                                                                                            | In Cont |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------- |
| Federation, Residuary powers w/ state, based on BR parliamentary form, Chancellor is PM, Prez is Const Head             |         |
|                                                                                                                         |         |
| Problem of hung assembly, Bundestag 4 yr term, Bundesrat upper house can veto legislation, States do not have equal rep |         |
|                                                                                                                         |         |
 

 

| JP const                                                                                     | IN const |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| Parliamentary, constitutional Monarchy, 2 houses of Diet, PM has to be elected by both house |          |
|                                                                                              |          |
| Article 9 renounces the policy of war, forces only for self defence                          |          |
|                                                                                              |          |
 

 

| CAN                                                                                                                 | IN  |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --- |
| Monarchy BR queen formal head, written const put exec authority to Monarchy, but unwritten convention PM exercises, |     |
|                                                                                                                     |     |
| Federal parliament, residuary power w/ centre,                                                                      |     |
|                                                                                                                     |     |
| Charter of rights and freedom                                                                                       |     |
|                                                                                                                     |     |
 

 

| Australian Const                                                                          | IN  |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --- |
| Federation like US, Residuary powers w/ state, written, compulsory to vote for people  18 |     |
 

 

![Comparison scheme w. r. t Indian Constitution Indian Constitution Executive vested in the President President elected by electoral college Party Guernment States cannot conclude treaties Supremacy of Judiciary No referendum Swiss Constitution Executive vested in the Federal Council Federal Council elected by Federal Assembly Absent Cantons can conclude treaties Judiciary cannot rule invalid a fed Referendum possible ](Static---comparison-of-IN-cons-image1-23204174.png)

# PYQ
2020-10-30 14:02:37
            
---


Comparison of Indian Constitution


  

Q. India and USA are two large democracies. Examine the basic tenants on which the two political systems are based. 2018


  

Indian Constitution, Historical Underpinnings etc - Questions <!--SR:!2021-09-15,3,250-->

|     Under what   circumstances can the Financial Emergency be proclaimed by the President of   India? What consequences follow when such a declaration remains in force?                                                                                                                                     |     2018    |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|     Examine the scope   of Fundamental Rights in the light of the latest judgement of the Supreme   Court on Right to Privacy.     KS   Puttaswamy case                                                                                                                                                      |     2017    |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|     Discuss each   adjective attached to the word ‘Republic’ in the preamble. Are they   defendable in the present circumstances stances?                                                                                                                                                                    |     2016    |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|     Discuss the   possible factors that inhibit India from enacting for its citizens a uniform   civil code as provided for in the Directive Principles of State Policy.                                                                                                                                     |     2015    |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|     Khap Panchayats   have been in the news for functioning as extra-constitutional authorities,   often delivering pronouncements amounting to human rights violations. Discuss   critically the actions taken by the legislative, executive and the judiciary   to set the things right in this regard.    |     2015    |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|     Does the right to   clean environment entail legal regulations on burning crackers during Diwali?   Discuss in the light of Article 21 of the Indian Constitution and   Judgement(s) of the Apex Court in this regard.                                                                                   |     2015    |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|     What do you   understand by the concept “freedom of speech and expression”? Does it cover   hate speech also? Why do the films in India stand on a slightly different   plane from other forms of expression? Discuss.                                                                                   |     2014    |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |             |
|     Discuss Section   66A of IT Act, with reference to its alleged violation of Article 19 of the   Constitution.                                                                                                                                                                                            |     2013    |




