# Mughal Architecture
2020-04-27 12:37 :30

```toc
```
---


## Under Babar 
-   Not impressed w/ turko afghan monuments, thrilled with Rajput buildings of Gwalior
-   Undertook constructions in Delhi, Agra, Sikri, Bayana, Panipat, Dholpur, Gwalior, Koil
-   2 mosques survived in Panipat and Sambhal
-   Employed Albanian architect Sinan from Constantinople but did not materialise

## Under Humayun
-   Din Panah palace in Delhi, razed by SSS
-   2 mosques one at Agra and other at Fatehabad have survived

## Under Akbar 
-   reign was formative period of Mughal architecture fusion of Indo Islamic architecture.
-   Certain features were :
    -   use of red sandstone,
    -   trabeated construction
    -   arches used mainly as decorative form,
    -   dome was Lodi type sometimes built hollow but never of true double order,
    -   shafts of the pillars were multifaceted and capitals took form of bracket supports,
    -   patterns carved were inlaid, boldly carved and bright coloured.


###  Building Projects Phase 1 was at Agra
-   Allahabad and Lahore : Agra fort had massiveness and inculcated Bengal and Gujarat style of architecture.
-   Jahangiri Mahal are the only representative buildings of Akbar's reign as all other structures were demolished by Shah Jahan for remodelling. It shows the fusion of Hindu and Islamic elements. The apartments are assymetric, it consists of a central gateway leading to domed hall elaborately carved. Entire construction is in red sandstone.
-  Delhi Gate at Agra fort represents earliest arch effort and shows start of new era in building art.

### Building Projects 2nd Phase was at Fatehpur Sikri 
-   The city does not follow any concious plan, 
-   public areas are designed as courtyards viz Diwan i am and Jami Masjid. 
-   Assymetry is common, use of red sandstone and traditional trabeate construction is seen.
 
#### 2 Categories of Building in Fatehpur Sikri

##### Religious 
- Jami Masjid, Buland Darwaza, Tomb of Salim Chisti, Ibadat Khana are religious buildings. 
- were made in archuate styles.
- Jami Masjid 
	- uses typical plan of a mosque has a central courtyard, arcades on three sides and domed skyline. 
	- Entrance from East 
	- modeled as big gateway modeled as a hexagonal porch.
-   Buland Darwaza : 
	-   to commemorate Akbars victory over Gujarat in 1576.
	-   made in **red and yellow sandstone with white marble inlay** outlining the span of the arches.
-   Tomb of Salim Chishti 
	-   beautiful jaali work in white marble. 
	-   Has arabesque patterns with Quranic inscriptions	
	-   stands in the courtyard of the Jami Masjid in the north-western quarter, 
	-   one of the finest **specimens of marble work** in India. 
	-   serpentine brackets supporting the eaves and the carved lattice screens are remarkable features

##### Secular 
-   Secular buildings were Palaces, administrative buildings etc made in trabeate style. ex. Jodhabai's palace, Panch Mahal etc
-   Ain I Akbari of Abul Fazl Observes mentions his public works in detail
-   Regulation of house building are necessary, 
- Panch Mahal 
	- 5 storied made of columns used concept of Persian Badgir.
	- All the 5 pillars of Panch Mahal is distinctive in style. 
- Diwan i Khas 
	- 2 storied and rectangular with a flat roof. 
	- The main architectural object is the central column.
-   Various other buildings are Pachisi Court,Jodhabai's Palace ,Diwan i Am, Carvansarais, Karkhana's, Naubat Khana, Water works near Hathi Pol.

## Under Jahangir :

-   There was **more focus on painting** and less on architecture.
-   He however built Akbars Tomb in Sikandra, His own tomb at lahore, Shalimar Bagh in Kashmir and Moti Masjid in Lahore.
-   Noor Jahan made the tomb of Itmad ud Daulah.
-   **His time saw white marble becoming chief building material** replacing red sandstone.
-   Pietra dura technique was widespread during this time.
- Jahangir was very fond of flora and fauna of the country he has described in great detail the flora of Kashmir along with a long list of birds including those that are not found in Kashmir.

 
## Under Shah Jahan and Later Mughals :

-   Apart from Taj Mahal he built Red Fort and Jama Masjid in Delhi, Shalimar Bagh and Shahjahanabad city.
- **Muhammad Azam Shah** was the last Mughal ruler to under-take architectural construction.
-  built the Biwi ka Maqbara and the Zinat Mahal.


## Mughal Gardens
-   Babar laid out the 1st at Agra called Hasn't Bihisht or Nur I Afshan,
-   Akbar gardens at Agra fort, Fatehpur Sikri, Sikandra, Srinagar.
-   Jahangir - Shalimar, Mughal garden at Shahdra/Lahore,
-   Nishat Bagh in Srinagar by Asaf Khan
-   Geometrical in design, lay out, under charge of experience horticulturist
-   Square or rectangle, whole space further split into symmetrical parts
-   Various parks covered w/ thick carpet of velvet like grass, symmetrically laid out flower bed, cluster elegant trees


Influence of Rajput arch on Mughal Arch
- [ ] #todo 

## PYQs



**Mughal architecture**


1. Write a short essay on: "The zenith of Mughal architecture under Shahjehan" [2001, 20m]
-   [Shah Jahan :](onenote: [[Mughal]] %20Architecture&section-id={F2E53E2C-6BC4-44B8-8617-CBFBF5C7389F}&page-id={7CD343AB-98EE-4B80-8115-C3753AA4F946}&object-id={25568B79-5DB8-4D28-9E7C-5E95D61F9E57}&43&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Culture%20in%20the%20Mughal%20Empire.one ) more content needed




2. Explain the principal features of architecture during Akbar's rule. What changes were made in them by Shahjahan? [2002, 60m]
-   [Architecture under Akbar :](onenote: [[Mughal]] %20Architecture&section-id={F2E53E2C-6BC4-44B8-8617-CBFBF5C7389F}&page-id={7CD343AB-98EE-4B80-8115-C3753AA4F946}&object-id={D2FD3F70-1CA2-43E6-9D16-A0CCAB044398}&10&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Culture%20in%20the%20Mughal%20Empire.one )




3. "The art of building was carried to to highest degree of perfection under Shahjahan". Illustrate by giving architecture details of two of his most celebrated buildings. [2018, 15
Marks]
-   [Shah Jahan : more content needed](onenote: [[PYQ]] &section-id={F2E53E2C-6BC4-44B8-8617-CBFBF5C7389F}&page-id={BB6CC2EC-FC1C-4CEC-B08C-D64D8AE90F76}&object-id={87159144-1080-49E5-A68F-0CFF7B995A6F}&F&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/Culture%20in%20the%20Mughal%20Empire.one )



