# Mughal Painting
2020-04-27 12:37:38
```toc
```
---


##  Mughal Era Miniature Painting :

-   Glorified the **ruler**, focusing on **hunting** scenes, **historical** events and other court related paintings.
-   Religious paintings were virtually absent.
-   They introduced the **technique of foreshortening** where objects looked close and smaller than they really were.


##  Early Mughals :
-   Babur patronized artists like Bizhad.
-   Humayun patronized artists like Abdus Samad and Mir Sayyid Ali. They both went on to work under Akbar as well.
 

##  Akbar :
-   Estd a formal artistic studio called Tasvir Khana.
-   use of 3 D figures defining feature and use of calligraphy.
-   saw transformation of popular art to court art.
-   Other imp artists Daswant, Basawan and Kesu.
-   Prominent illustrated manuscripts made during his time were. Hamzanama, Tutinama, Anvar i suhaili and Gulistan of Sadi
 
### Fine Arts
-   Akbar nationalised all arts by extending liberal patronage
-   Gave 1st definite impulse, Mughal school of painting
-   Mir Sayyid Ali of Tabriz, Khawaja Abdus Samad style the Shirinqalam - sweet ppen
-   Daswanth, Basawan
-   Dastan I Amir I Hamza rep in 12 volumes,
-   Ain I Akbari, Razmnama, Ramayana, Nal Damayanti, Kalia Damnah, Aiyar Danish
-   Abdul Hasan title Nadir Uz Zaman under Jehangir
-   Others under him were Farruk Beg, Nadir, Murad, Bishan Das, Madhava, Manohar, Tulsi, Keshava brother
-   Under SJ painters were Md Qadir, Mir Hasan, Anup Chitra, Chintamani,

##  Jahangir :
-   Paintings at zenith.
-   naturalism related depicting flora and fauna.
-   unique trend use of decorated margins.
-   Famous artists were Ustad Mansoor.
-   Imp works of this period are Ayar i Danish and Tuzuk i Jahangiri.

### Narrative Painting under Akbar and Jehangir
- [ ]   #todo 
 

##  Shah Jahan 
-   Artificial elements with reduced liveliness. European influence.
-   Use of Charcoal, pencil and gold and silver were seen to make drawings.
-   The Padshahnanma showing courtiers and servants of the kings was an imp work of this period.
 

##  Aurangzeb :
-   Art declined as he was not enthusiastic but this led to the dev of regional school.
 

##  Influence of Rajput style on Mughal painting and Art :
- [ ]   #todo

 






