# The Sur Empire
2020-04-27 12:26:46
```toc
```
---

## Early life and Rise to power
- His family came to India during Ibrahim Lodi's reign and were given the iqta of Hisar Firouza.
- Born as Farid he had an estranged relation with his father but was later reconciled and was granted adm of 2 parganas. As a child he studied religious work, Arabic, history etc.
- During his adm tenure he levied taxes generously but collected them strictly. 
- Later he was discharged due to intrigues by her step mother.
- After the death of his father he armed w/ Ibrahim Lodis farman ousted his step brothers.
- Later when IL was defeated by Babar Bahar Khan (to whom he was close) declared himself king.
- Bahar Khan was son of Governor of Bihar Daulat Khan Nuhani. He gave Farid the title of Sher Khan.

**Factors that led to his rise :**
1. Bihar-Jaunpur strife b/w the Sarwanis and Farmulis of Jaunpur and Nuhani's of Bihar to expand and conquer more and more territories virtually led to the end of Nuhani dynasty -> created a political vacuum.
2. Conflict in Afghan households over division of iqta. 
3. Important position enjoyed by Afghan women -> had them inherit vast amounts of wealth and power after death of their husbands. After Bo Panipat many rulers and nobles died. Sher Shah married their widows and got access to their wealth. Ex Dud, Lad Malika, Gauhar Gosain, Bibi Fath Malika.
4. Constant Bihar-Bengal conflict 

### Economy under Sher Shah and Islam Shah 
-   New revenue officials were appointed
-   the powers and privileges of land assignees ie wajahdars and muqtas were curtailed.
- @  Crop Sharing and Revenue sharing was abolished and Zabit was enforced everywhere.
-   Extra taxes called **Jaribana** and **muhassilana** were also abolished.
-   Land was to be measured every year at harvest time
-   States share was determined according to royal regulation.
-   In Multan and Sindh it was 1/4th of produce elsewhere it was 1/3rd.
- $  Abul Fazl tells that soil was divided into 3 types good, middle and bad. The revenue was determined by market price.
-   Islam Shah paid salaries in cash instead of Jagirs.

#### Iqta System -
-   Certain Sarkars and Parganas were reserved for Khalisa whose revenue went directly to the state. Its collectors were called as **shiqqdars**.
-   These iqtas were assigned to a muqta or a wajahdar. They were made transferable under Sher Shah.


# Sher Shah's Administration
2020-04-27 12:26:57

---

- He slaughtered the rajputs of Chanderi in MP even after promising them safe conduct. This is a blemish on his character.
- @ His foremost contribution was estd of law and order over the length and breadth of the empire.

### Administration under Sher Shah 
-   Was inspired by Alauddin Khalji's reforms.
- After securing his postion in Punjab and NW, Sher Shah had time to build up a sound system of adm.
- After consolidating his position he fortified old forts ex Ajmer, Merta and Jodhpur and built new ones.
1.   Village 
		-   headed by a Muqqaddam/Headman who looked after law and order. 
		-   Patwari kept accounts. Both were had a share in produce and were not govt servants.
2.   Pargana was the lowest unit which had a number of villages.
		-    Shiqdar was head of it who looked after law and order and general adm.
		-    Munsif or Amil to measure land for rev collection. They were resp for collecting rev. The post of amil was changed every 2 years.
		-    Assisted by 2 clerks and language used was Persian and Hindavi
		-    Khanzadar or Poddar kept cadh and collected money
  1. Sarkar : Was called a shiq but started being called a Sarkar since the Lodis. 	
	  - Each sarkar comprised of a number of parganas. 	
		-   Sarkar was the administrative cum fiscal unit.
		-   Head was faujdar or muqta assisted by munsif or munsif-i-munsifan who assessed land revenue, settled boundary disputes b/w parganas. 
  2. Wilayat comprised of a no of sarkars aka Khitta. 
		  - Mostly provincial organisation did not exist in Sultanate but existed in frontier areas like Punjab and Bengal. 
		  - Amin or Muqta was head who was a military commander.
-   Nobles posted in wilayats were controlled through imperial farmans.
-   Non Afghan Nobles like Khawwas Khan, Haji Khan and Habib Khan
-   Sultani were appointed to high posts.
-   Islam Shah succeeded Sher Shah.
-   He reorganised the nobility and dismissed many of them
-   He was benevolent towards the people however.
-   Sadr looked after revenue free grants to religious people, scholars etc.
-   Laid great emphasis on Justice. Qazis were appointed throught out the kingdom for it.
-   Panchayat and caste bodies continued to provide civil law to Hindus. Zamindars and Shiqdars dispensed with criminal justice.

####  Army Organisation under Sher Shah
- Introduced branding/ dagh of horses and descriptive role/ Chehra. This was extended to sweepers, female slaves etc.
- Himself fixed monthly stipend of newly recruited soldiers. 
- Nobles and soldies were paid in terms of iqtas. 
- Dept of Ariz looked after army. 
- Employed a large number of spies
 

### Construction works
- &  Construction of numerous Makhtabs, Madrassas, civil hospitals, sarais, bridges, roads throughout empire
-   His emphasis on laying roads was to ensure zamindars were in control along with it being safe from robbers. Ex action against Fath Khan Jat.
-   Muqaddams and Zamindars were made responsible for apprehending culprits. They were made responsible if theft took place under their charge.
-   Roads improved communication, military movt and trade commerce. 
-   4 national highways
    1.   Grand Trunk road from Sonargaon in Bengal to Attock in NWF
    1.   Agra to mandu
    1.   Agra to jodhpur and Chittor
    1.   Lahore to Multan
-   Planted green trees along these roads
- &  1700 sarais provided suitable accommodation at a distance of 4miles, cooking facilities, drinking water -> dev into centres of trade.
	-   Had separate apartments for Hindus and Muslims. Food as per caste rules were to be given out of the govt excequer.
	- !  Sahana used to head them
	- Also served as dak chaukies/ resting place for postal carriers/ news carriers.
	-   2 horsemen at each sarai to carry royal mail.
-   Purana Qila built in Delhi.

### Economy and Revenue under Sher Shah
- Struct coins of silver and copper of uniform standard replacing debased and mixed metal coins. Ex Silver rupee.
- Took steps to standarise weight and measures.
- $ Abbas Sarwani tells that Custom was collected only twice. Once during entry and once during sale. 
- Wanted that land rev should not be based on cropsharing or estimation. Insisted upon system of measurement/ Zabti.
- Earlier the crop yield was estimated on the basis of sample cuttings.
- He divided lands into 3 categories : good, bad and middling. Average of this was calculated and 1/3rd of average was state's share. 
- Crop rate/ Ray was made on which share of state calculated since Sher Shah preferred cash. But could be paid in both cash and kind. Multan was only exempted.

```ad-Views

**Abul Fazl** : Under Sher Shah and Islam Shah Hindustan passed from crop sharing and estimation to measurement.

**Irfan Habib** : System of Measurement was only prevalent in settled parts of empire in doab. 

```

 - Amt each peasant had to pay was written in a Patta. 
 - Was very careful to not entering into cultivated regions when his army marched to avoid trampling. This was only for the complying zamindars.
 - Those who did not had their villages captured men slain, women, children enslaved.
 
###  Architecture under him
- Build a mausolem for himself in Sasaram. 
- City at Delhi. Padmavat by Malik Muhammad Jaisi was produced during his reign.

### Nature of state under him and Islam Shah
- Bridge b/w Afghan and Turkish theories of sovereignty. Afghan sardars were not considered partners in Kingdom.
- Paid attention to needs of nobles. Ex Khawas Khan was given a large iqta. 
- Nobility was primarily Afghan. 
- Was also a welfare state. SS maintained a large langar khana for free food to poor and needy. 
- Jizya was collected as city tax and as land revenue in the countryside.
- More Hindus were appointed to revenue dept opportunities for them widened. Ex Hemu.

####  Factors that led to the downfal/ State under Islam Shah 
- Islam Shah tried to assert the superior position of monarchy by treating the nobles as servants and not as partners.
- Issued detailed instruction every friday to all high grandees including commanders of 5000 sawars or more. 
- Tried to exercise greater financial control -> made nobles believe that he wanted all the land be converted into Khalisa.

## PYQs

**The Sur Empire: Sher Shah's administration**

1. Examine the major contributions of the Sur rulers to the administrative system. [1981,
20m]

```ad-Answer

```

2. Bring out the significance of the reign of Sher Shah in the history of India. [1986, 60m]

```ad-Answer

```
3. Make a comparative review of the agrarian reforms of Alauud-Din Khalji and Sher Shah
Suri. [1995m 60m]
```ad-Answer

```
4. Write a short essay on: "Sher Shah combined in himself qualities of lion and fox." [1999,
20m]
-   **Cunning/Clever - Chanderi 1543 campaign massacre after declaring amnesty on surrender, Chausa attack on sleeping Mughal soldier. Brave/Fearless - in economic, adm, mil reforms**

```ad-Answer

```