# Maratha Ascendance under the Peshwas
2020-04-27 12:38:56

```toc
```
---

-   Founded by Shivaji → Shambhaji → Rajaram → Tarabai/Shivaji II → Shahu w/ Balaji Vishwanath's help. 
-   Treaty of Warna bw previous 2 - Baji Rao adversary Nizam of Hyderabad for control of Ktaka, Khandesh, Gujarat - Balaji Baji Rao
-   Local deshmukhs frequently shifted loyalty b/w Marathas and Mughals
-   Baji Rao drove out Portugues from Bassein and Chaul in 1737.    Captured Gujarat, parts of karnataka, Malwa by 1739
-   Peak under BBR, 1751 captured orissa, treaty of Bhalke w/ Nizam in 1751, 1752 M emperor under protection of Marathas
-   1761 3rd Bo Panipat Sadashiv Rao Bhao was routed
-   Could not bcom empire/alternative to M due to confederacy, 
-   tried to distribute Saranjam/ transferable land to change horizontal hierarchyt to a vertical one
      > **Frank Perlin** : often cut across traditional status
-   Continuos process of adjustment and balancing led coexistence of centralised kinghsip and local loyalties


## Balaji Vishwanath 1713-1720
- Came from a family of Deshmukhs/revenue collectors, 7th Peshwa.
- BV sided with Shahu against Tarabai's forces who were defeated at Khed in 1707
- Tarabai gained against shahu intriguing with his Senapati Chandrasen. During this time Shahu's supporter Mughal Emperor Zulfikar Khan was killed.
- BV used diplomacy to save Shahu's throne. He defated Chandrasen won over Kanhoji towards his side.
- Shau's treaty/intrigue with Hussain Ali Sayyid of Deccan to oust Farrukhsiar 
	 - Secure release of Mother and Brother from Delhi
	 - full possession of Shivaji Swarajya/ homeland of Shivaji
	 - recently conquered territories be ceded to Shahu viz Khandesh, Berar, Gondwana etc
	 - Chauth and Sardeshmukhi rights for all Mughal Subahs in Deccan and in lieu of this Marathas would give 15,000 troops at the Emperors disposal
	 - Shahu would not harm Sambhaji
	 - 10lk annual tribute to M Emperor
 - BV went w/ Maratha contingent of 15k soldiers and ousted Farrukhsiar and Rafi ud Darjat was put in his place
 
 ```ad-Views
collapse: open

**Richard Temple** : the gains from this treaty constituted the Magna Carta of the Maratha dominion 

```

- Shahu's positioned were legalised and formalised. This was a setback for Shambhaji
- He died while trying to subdue Shambhaji of Kolhapur

### Estimate of Balaji Vishwanath
- Was a self made man, a politician and a statesman
- Diplomatic victories to win over Dhanaji, Khaderao, Kanhoji etc
- secured Shahu the support of rich bankers viz Madhaji Krishna Joshi 
- Treaty w/ Hussain Ali was fin boost to Shahu's treasury

```ad-Views

**Richard Temple** : BV was a typical Brahman with a calm and commanding intellect. Genius diplomat and master of Finance.

**Kincaid and Parasnis** : granting lands instead of salaries was a departure from Shivaji's rule. In the absence of of the cammanding talent and energy of Shahu. He substituted autocracy with the Maratha Confederacy.

**HN Sinha** : He did not indulge in creating a sphere of influience for himself which further credits him of being a great statesman.

```


## Baji Rao I 1720-40

### Challenges faced by him
- Nizam challenge Maratha right to Chauth and Sardeshmukhi in Deccan
- Shamhbaji II of Kolhapur refused to recognise Shahu
- certain portion of Shivaji's Swarajya was under Siddhis control
- fissiparious tendencies of Maratha Chiefs to assert independence

### Measures taken
- formulated a policy of conquest of the North and proposed this to Shahu as a measure to drive out foreigners.
- preached the ideal of Hindu-pad-padshahi or Hindu empire against a common enemy Mughals
-  Nizam Asaf Jah supported claims of Shambhaji and attacked Shahu into virtual submission but was rescued by BR-I and enforced the treaty of Mungi-Sivagaon on him.
- Treaty of Warna b/ Shambhaji accepted Vassalage of Shahu and estd BR-I as a great diplomat and strategist.
- Secured right to Chauth and Sardehsmukhi of Gujarat and Malwa
- Bundelkhand was conquered after appeal by Chattrasal after frequent inroads by Muhammad Khan Bangash
- He raided Delhi in 1737 after Malhar Rao Holkar's forces were repelled by Saadat Khan or Oudh.
- The Nizam was defeated in 1737 at Battle of Bhopal. Large portions of his territories were ceded w/ 50lkh rupees war indemnity.

### Estimate of Baji Rao
- Was an astute diplomat, statesman, empire builder, a man of action and a soldier
- His strategy of clever manouvers, cutting supplies of the enemy was very successful
- Great eye to scout leaders such as Sindhias, Holkars, Pawars etc
- Empire builder. Shifted political center from Delhi to Poona

```ad-Views

**VG Dighe** : lack of foresight, made no attempt to mould or reform the political institutions. Feudal tendencies among Marathas showed when empire extended towards the farthest corners of India.

**JN Sarkar** : Created an unchangeable position of Prime Minister in the Maratha Raj.

**Richard Temple** : He is remembered to this day as the fighting Peshwa and an incarnation of Hindu energy.

**HN Sinha** : BR had the head to pland and the hand to execute. 

```


## Balaji Baji Rao 1740-1761
- After BV peshwaship had become hereditary
- Sangola Agreement 1750 had mad the Maratha King a do-nothing king and all the power was vested in the Peshwa.
- He consolidated Maratha positions in Malwa and Bundelkhand by signing a treaty with Muhammad Shah for Civil and criminal administration in Malwa and defeated Orchha king to capture Jhansi in 1742.
- Extended his influence Eastward and Southward.  He sent Raghuji to Carnatic where Dost Ali was killed and Chanda Sahib taken as prisoner. In East Alivardi Khan was defeated and he surrendered Orissa and agreed to pay Chauth of Bengal and Bihar
- Nizam of Hyderabad was subdued and areas of Ahamdnagar, Daulatabad Burhanpur captured.

### Leading upto the battle of Panipat
- Ruhela and Pathan chiefs wanted to set up a Pathan kingdom and Delhi w/ Ahmad Shah Abdali's help -> Safdar Jung collaborated w/ the Marathas in 1752 by paying them 50 lakh for protecting Empire againt internal and external enemeies.
- After 1757 invasion of Abdali. A Maratha army led by Raghunath Rao and Malhar Rao Holkar was sent to Delhi. Emperor was reinstated and later Abdali's governor of Lahore was expelled.
- Dattaji Sindhia was killed at Thanesar and Malhar Rao's attempts to harass Abdali's troops was not successful
- A strong army from Poona was sent under Sadashiv Rao Bhau who met on 14 Jan 1761 where the Marathas were routed.

### Estimate of Balaji Baji Rao
- Gifted w/ quality of leadership, gave momentum of Maratha expansion which reached its Zenith
- Administration of justice and revenue was greatly improved. 
- Estd a strong police force in Poona. Panchayat system was reformed.
- Buit and improved roads, gave religious donations, planted trees along roads.
- Aim of uniting all Hindus received a blow as Rajput kingdoms and Jat fortress were ravaged. It was ended by the 3rd Bo Panipat
- BBR failed to keep proper control over subordinates, fissiparious tendencies increased.
- Gave undue attention to political dev at Delhi and failed to realise the real strength of the British. His political judgement was Myopic.

## Third Battle of Panipat
- Maratha conquest of Punjab was a direct challenge to Abdali. 
- Abdali was assisted by Najib Khan, Bangash Pathans, Shuja Ud Daula, Rohilla Chiefs etc

```ad-Views

**Sydney Owen** : Ahmad Shah sympathaised w/ the Rohillas, was a devout Muslim and resented Maratha aggression. 

**JN Sarkar** on Maratha losses : There was not a a home in Maharashtra that did not morn the loss of a member, several generation of leaders were cut off at one stroke.
```
### Causes of Maratha Defeat
- Abdali's forces outnumbered Sadashiv Bhau.
- Near famine conditions prevailed in Maratha camp, their supplies from Delhi cut off whereas Afghan supply lines were open 
- Their policy of plunder had alienated virtually all Muslim powers of Northern India and Hindu powers viz Jats and Rajputs. Even Sikhs did not help them.
- Mutual jealousies of Maratha commanders,their indivdualistic nature and casteist loyalties made them weak internally.
- Afghans were better equipped and trained.
- Bhau excluded many others from his council viz Malhar Rao etc. He did not leave women and Children who accompanied the army as advised by Suraj Mal. His arrogance and overconfidence caused the failure of the Marathas

### Political Significance

```ad-Views

**GS Sardesai** : There was no decisive politcal consequences Mahadji Sindhia and Nanaphadnavis escaped and later resuscitated Maratha power to its former glory. It brought unique experience of war and politics, heightened their national pride and sentiment made them shine higher.

**JN Sarkar** : Has discredited Maratha historians for minimising the political results of the Battle. It left the road for Raghunath Dada open.   

**Sydney Owen** : Maratha power was shattered to atoms which the British power ultimately mastered and disintigrated.

**RB Sardesai** : Panipat indirectly ushered a new partiicpant in the struggle for IN supremacy. 

```

- Lowered Maratha Prestige in Indian political world.
- Dream of an all India empire was finised

##   Relationship b/w Maratha state and Mughal Sys debate

```ad-Views
 
 **Irfan Habib** : was outcome of zamindar revolt against opressive Mughal Bureaucracy
  
  **Satish Chandra** : departure from Mug tradition
  
  **Andre Wink** : Marathas were within Mughal tradition, as they built their power on notion of sedition/fitna
```

-   Maratha had many civilian revenue collectors who were not mil commanders this was major diff
-   Other than above Mughal tradition remained central to social and political life
 

##   Role of Maratha Confederacy in establishing the Empire
- [ ]   #todo 
 

##   Bureaucracy of the Peshwas
 - [ ] #todo 
 - Combination of Hindu and Mohammedan insitutions.
 - Shahu openly acknowledged the Supremacy of the Mughal emperor which was not the case before.

### Chattrapati 
 - Head of the Empire was Chhtrapati the Raja of Satara.
 - made all high appointments, granted sanads etc.
 - his power dec as Peshwaship became hereditary. Scotwaring remarked that this usurpation neither attarcted observation nor excited surprise it was easy, natural and progressive.

### Pehswa
- He was originally the mem of Ashtapradhan of Shivaji
- BV made it hereditary and BR-I made it pre-eminent even more powerful than the Raja.
- Old aristocracy failed to reconised him as superior to the Raja. They saw him as a deputy to him and their equal.
- Newer nobility saw themselves as his children.
- this rise in power led to inc individualism. 

> **SN Sen** : ultimately the ME became the Holy Roman Empire, a loose confederacy of ambitious feudal chiefs and the Emperor only exercised power on territories under his direct personal control.

### Central Administration
- Huzur Daftar was Peshwa's secretariat at Poona. All accounts of Revenue and Expenditure were done here. 
- Rozkirds were daily registers of all rev transaction
- El Beriz daftar dealt w/ accounts of all sorts and prepared Tarjuma ie an index of all expenditure and Khataunis : abstract of all expenditure in alphabetical order
- Chalte Daftar : under direct charge of Fadnavis.

### Provincial and District Administration 
- Big provinces like Khandesh, Gujarat, Carnatic were under a Sarsubahdars. 
- Certain Sarsubahdars had Mamlatdar who reported rev assessment to directly to central govt. They were head of administrative division of Sarkar, Subah or Pant and could head over various dept ex agriculture, civil-criminal justice, control of local militia etc
- Deshmukhs were other officers who served as checks on Mamlatdar. They used to corroborate accounts of Mamlatdars.
- Smaller adm division were called Mahals or Tarfs were run similar to districts

### Local or Village Administration
- Chief village officer was Patel who had judicial, revenue and adm functions -> acted as link b/w Peswas officials and village.
- He did not receive any salary from the state.
- Next to him was Kulkarni who was the village clerk. 
- Chaugula was below the Kulkarni who assisted the Patel
- Bara Balutas were 12 village artisans they were assisted by Bara Alutas

### Administration of Justice
- Maratha law based on works like Manusmriti, Mitakshara and old customs
- Patel was judicial officer in Villages, Mamlatdar in district, Sarsubadar above him then the Peshwa. Raja of Satara was highest.
- Nyayadhish in towns undertook judicial functions. No sep of executive and Judiciary
- No codified law or procedure for trial. Emphasis on amicable settlement.
- Panchayat main instrument of civil justice aka Panch Parmeshwar. Their decision was binding.
- Capital punishment not there under Shahu and BBR and for serious crimes like Murder, Treason punishment was imprisonment and confiscation of property. Main idea was reform not retribution.

### Police
- Elphinstone and Tone have applauded policing of M.
> **Tone** :  After firing of Gun at 10 at night no person can be in streets without being taken up by Patrol. Pehswa was once himself kept prisoner for whole night.

### Revenue Administration #important 
- Land revenue main source of income. Shivaji preferred share in actual produce of field but Peshwas wanted grant of land on long lease for a fixed state demand.
- Classification land a/c to fertility was influenced by Mughal Adm. Irrigation sys was very old.
- Newly brought land under cultivation was lightly taxed. Waste and Rocky lands were granted as Inam or rent free concession offered for 20 yrs.
- Remission during famines etc. ***Tagai*** was state loans at low interest rate.
-  State demand not unfiorm accross empire. Main idea was security of tax payer -> reverted during Baji Rao II who started giving land to hight bidder.

#### Other Sources of State Rev
- Chauth 25% and Sardeshmukhi 10% of total tax collection on areas overrun by Marathas. 
- Chauth was divided among the Raja, Pant Sachiv and Maratha Sirdars for maintaining troops.
- If these lands were annexed the remaining 65% of land was called Jagir and given out.
- Revenue from forests, customs, excise, mints etc. 
- Valentia estimated it to be Rs.71 lakh, J Grant as 6 crores inclding chauth, Elphinstone Rs96 Lakh by the end of 18th century. 

###### System of Collection of Revenue
- [ ] #todo 

```ad-Views
collapse: open

**SN Sen** : Whole adm was combination of democracy and feudal autocracy.

**Tone** has called it a Military republic based upon jealousy not confidence.

**SM Edwardes** : constitution of govt and army was calculated to destroy rather than to create an empire.

```


##   Mughal Court Intrigues
 - [x] #todo 
 - Farrukhsiar came to throne w/ the help of Sayyid brothers Hussain Ali and Abdullah Khan
 - To get rid of Hussain Ali he sent him as viceroy of Deccan and at the same time instigated Daud Khan of Gujarat and Shahu to dispose him -> followed by dec of Abdullah Khan's position in Delhi
 - Hussain Ali was called back so he befriended the Marathas.

## PYQs



**Maratha ascendancy under the Peshwas**




1. Why did the Marathas fail in establishing a lasting empire in India? [1981, 20m]
-   [Founded by Shivaji - Shambhaji - Rajaram](onenote: [[Maratha]] %20Ascendance%20under%20the%20Peshwas&section-id={30386B1C-9406-434A-B7BA-78E4BA561A0D}&page-id={D9CBFE94-2416-4FBF-AFFE-5069BB32E3DE}&object-id={0C928192-786D-4D05-8BAD-F4289AC8821D}&14&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/18th%20Century.one )




2. How far did Peshwa Bajirao I succeed in establishing Maratha supremacy in the Deccan and political hegemony in the North? [1983, 60m]
-   [Founded by Shivaji - Shambhaji - Rajaram](onenote: [[Maratha]] %20Ascendance%20under%20the%20Peshwas&section-id={30386B1C-9406-434A-B7BA-78E4BA561A0D}&page-id={D9CBFE94-2416-4FBF-AFFE-5069BB32E3DE}&object-id={0C928192-786D-4D05-8BAD-F4289AC8821D}&14&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/18th%20Century.one )




2. Write a short answer on: "Structure and role of the Maratha Confederacy." [1987, 20m]
-   [Could not bcom empire/alternative to M it was a](onenote: [[Maratha]] %20Ascendance%20under%20the%20Peshwas&section-id={30386B1C-9406-434A-B7BA-78E4BA561A0D}&page-id={D9CBFE94-2416-4FBF-AFFE-5069BB32E3DE}&object-id={0C928192-786D-4D05-8BAD-F4289AC8821D}&2D&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/18th%20Century.one )


3. Compare the Peshwas' bureaucratic management with that of the Imperial Mughal administration. [2015, 10m]
-   



4. Is it true that the court intrigues and weak revenue system led to the collapse of the Maratha empire? Comment. [2016, 15 Marks]
-   [Maratha Fiscal and Financial system](onenote: [[Maratha]] %20Fiscal%20and%20Financial%20System&section-id={30386B1C-9406-434A-B7BA-78E4BA561A0D}&page-id={0A38CD02-F629-464A-A4E7-71F32B18D9A4}&object-id={FCEB554A-CE4A-4166-9DFD-F2D39CB9068C}&10&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/18th%20Century.one )
-   [Court Intrigues](onenote: [[Maratha]] %20Ascendance%20under%20the%20Peshwas&section-id={30386B1C-9406-434A-B7BA-78E4BA561A0D}&page-id={D9CBFE94-2416-4FBF-AFFE-5069BB32E3DE}&object-id={1733D9CD-6E6A-4948-B878-3AE9B632B6D4}&18&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/18th%20Century.one )




5. How will you view the Maratha policy of expansion? Delineate. [2017, 20 Marks]
-   [Founded by Shivaji - Shambhaji - Rajaram](onenote: [[Maratha]] %20Ascendance%20under%20the%20Peshwas&section-id={30386B1C-9406-434A-B7BA-78E4BA561A0D}&page-id={D9CBFE94-2416-4FBF-AFFE-5069BB32E3DE}&object-id={0C928192-786D-4D05-8BAD-F4289AC8821D}&14&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Medieval%20India/Part%20II/18th%20Century.one )








