# State of Politics, Culture and Economy on the eve of British Conquest
2020-04-27 12:39 :45

```toc
```
---

## Politics

-   Weakening of centralised Mughal empire, dispersal of political power but no collapse

  > Richard Eaton - ideological and bureaucratic structure of Mughal imperialism continued to expand in Bengal delta
-   Constant adjustment b/w centripetal/centralised kingship and centrifugal/local loyalties
-   Rise of Vaishnavism in Bengal; **Firangi Mahal** in Lucknow as rationalist Islamic thought
-   Deccani sufi culture in Hyderabd and Arcot, Sringeri Math by TS

> Satish Chandra - trade was resilient both internal and external continued
-   Hundis used, indigenous bankers, extensive fin network

> CA Bayly - "creation of new wealth and social power in provinces" resulted in decline of centralised Mughal power


## Culture
### Education
- Education was linked to one's culture and religion for both Hindus and Muslims
- Chatuspatis or Tols came up in Bengal. Kasi, andia, Mithila, Utkala were centres for Sanskrit learning 
- Bernier described Kasi as Athens of India.
- Perisan and Arabic learning centres were Madrasahs. Azimabad/Patna was an imp centre
- Elementary education was taught in Pathshalas and Makhtabs and subjects were reading, writing and arithmetic.

### Arts and Literature
- Emergence of strong regional principalities -> development of local cultural forms
- Asaf ud Daula builth the Great Imambara for celebrating Muharram festival. 
- Sawai Jai Singh built pink city of Jaipur and 5 astronomical observatories.
- Ranjit Singh renovated Golden Temple.
- Vernacular Languages dev. 
- Chritian Missionaries set up the printing press and vernacular Bible was printed and circulated.
- Danish missionary Ziegenbelg composed Tamil version of the Bible 

## Economy
- Basic unit was still self-sufficient and self-governing village community. Its link with state was land revenue and they(village community) lasted when nothing else seemed to last.
- Town handicrafts had a world wide market
- Cotton from Dacca, Ahmedabad Masulipatnam; Silk from Murshidabad, Agra, Lahore, Gujarat; Woolen Shawls and Carpet; Gold and Silver Jewellery, metal work and utensils, arms etc were produced and exported.
- Trade eventually brought into existence of merchant-capitalists and banking system into play. Jagath Seths, Nagar Seths, Chetties in the south etc -> some pre condition of the rapid growth of capitalism did exist.
- Absence of codified laws and lack of political stability was limiting factors 

## PYQs

**Misc**.

1. "The Battle of Plassey that decided the fate of Bengal was won by Clive through intrigues." Explain. [2014, 15m]
-   

2. The political disintegration was responsible for the socio---economic decline in India during the 18th century." Comment [2017, 20 Marks]
-





