# Peasant Movements and Tribal Uprisings in the 18th and 19th Century

2020-05-07 13:57 :40

```toc
```

---

## Historians Views [^1]

```ad-Views


-   **Eric Sotkes** - 'primary resistance', traditional societies act of violent defiance
-   **DN Dhanagre** - Rev was pre political due to lack of organisation, program and ideology
-   **Ranajit Guha** - nothing in militant movt that was not political
    -   Clear awareness of relation of power in rural society, determination to overthrow
-   Class ideology missing so religion used
-   **Ramchandra Guha** - people in woods became restless against deprivation of customary user rights of forest
-   Rampa rebellion 1879 - sahukars, moneylenders took tribal peasants lands
    -   David Arnold - firuri did not take mass uprising form
-   Ban on shifting cultivation
-   Marias + Murias of Bastar

```

---

## Types of Rebellions [^2]

- popular resistance took three broad forms: civil rebellions, tribal uprisings and peasant movements

### Background

- Colonial economic policies, New land revenue system, colonial administration, judicial system and ruin of handicraft had impoverished the peasant
- One form that was taken to was to resort to petty crimes like robbery, dacoity etc

### Civil Rebellion

- Led by deposed Rajas their descendents, landlords, zamindars, poligars etc
- Peasants, artisans and demobilised soldiers were their support and man at arms
- **Reasons were local grievances** introduced through rapid change in economy, administration and land revenue system
- Landowners lost control of their land, peasants and artisans were indebted and forced into selling their property
- This was exacerbated by the rapid corruption in admin., police, judiciary etc
- religious preachers, priests, pandits and maulvis and men of arts and literature incited hatred against the foreign rulers

#### Limitation of These Rebellions

- were wholly local in their spread and isolated from each other
- They were result of local grievances which were common to almost all the rebellions
- **Leaders were backward looking** and traditional They did **not represent a societal alternative** and was old in ideological and cultural form

#### Significance

- Established a strong local tradition of resistance to the British Rule
- Suppression of civil rebellions was the major reason why the Revolt did not spread to South India, Most of the East and West India

### Tribal Revolts

#### Reasons for Tribal Revolts

- Colonisation under the British
- Recognised tribal chief as zamindar and introduced new system of revenue and taxation
- Influx of Christian missionaries into the tribal areas
- Influx of money lenders, traders, revenue farmers as middlemen. They ostracised the tribals, took their land and acted as henchmen of the British.
- Change in their traditional way of life, agrarian order.
- Ostracisation by officials, police

#### Characteristics of These Revolts

- Ethnic ties were the basic feature, tribals did not see themselves as a different class.
- Solidarity b/w tribals was unwavering they did not attack each other
- Non-tribal poor who worked in supporting role were not attacked. They were seen as allies.
- Attacks were spontaneous and done only when there was no alternative
- Religious leaders emerged as leader of the resistance in many areas.

## Various Different Movements and Uprisings [^3]

### Pabna Agrarian Crisis (1870s and 1880s)

- Caused due to Zamindars to enhance rents beyond legal limits and prevent tenants from acquiring occupancy rights under Act X of 1859. The act defined rights and obligations of different categories of interest in land.
- May 1873 the Pabna Agrarian League was found to resist demands of the zamindars
- Rent strikes were organised, procession to frighten zamindars were taken out
- Main form was that of legal resistance, there was very little violence
- Disputes were settled under official pressure and the govt supported the Zamindars wherever violence took place. But was neutral in cases of legal battles and peaceful agitations
- Gov passed the 1885 Bengal Tenancy Act protect tenants from zamindari oppression.

#### Characterstics

- Aims were limited to the redressal of the immediate grievances of the peasants and the enforcement of the existing legal rights
- not aimed at the zamindari system nor was it anti-British
- within the bounds of law and used the legal machinery
- Hindu Muslim solidarity.
- Intellectuals like Bankim Chandra Chatterjee and RC Chatterjee discussed the Bengal Tenancy Bill.
- Indian Association led by Surendranath Banerjee, Anand Mohan Bose and Dwarkanath Ganguli campaigned for the ryots.

### Sanyasi Revolt ( 1763-1800 ) Aka Fakir Rebellion

- originally by peasant but joined by a large number of dispossessed small zamindars , disbanded soldiers and rural poor
- against harsh economic order aka Fakir Rebellion.
- Majnum Shah MS , Chirag Ali CA, Musa Shah, Bhawani Pathak and Debi Chaudhurani were important leaders.
- Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay's novels Anandmath and Devi Chaudharani was written on this.

### Revolt in Midnapore and Dhalbhum (1766-74)

- Against introduction of new land revenue system by the zamindars
- **Dhalbhum** D, **Manbhum** M ,Raipur R, Panchet P, Jhatibuni , Karnagarh, and Bagri B.
- led by Damodar Singh DS and Jagannath Dhal JD.
- were dispossed of their Zamindari rights.

### Revolt of Moamarias (1769-99)

- peasant were against the **Ahom** kings who requested the help of Engilsh.
- Rangpur R (now in Bangladesh) and Jorhat J headquarters was at Bhatiapar B.

### Civil Uprisings in Gorakhpur, Basti and Bahraich (1781)

- Major **Alexander Hannay** opressed the izardars/ revenue farmers of the region with excessive revenue demand
- was dismissed and izara removed

### Revolt of Raja of Vizianagaram ( 1794 )

- was demanded tribute of **3** lakh rupees as tribute and disband his troops.
- Raja rose in revolt, he died in a battle at **Padmanabham**.

### Poligars' Revolt ( 1795-1805 )

- major centres were **Thirunelveli**, **Ramanathapuram**, **Sivaganga**, Sivagiri , Madurai, and North Arcot .
- Sovereignty of poligars were encroached and overTaxation were the reason. Kattabomman Nayakan, leader between 1795 and 1799.
- 2nd phase started in 1801 after poligars imprisoned in the fort of Palamcotta were able to escape. 1803 and 1805,
- the poligars of North Arcot rose again when they were deprived of their right to collect the kaval fees was a hereditary village police.

### Resistance of Kerala Varma Pazhassi Raja (1797 1800-05)

- Kerala Simham (Lion of Kerala) against Company levying exorbitant **rates of tax** on the peasants.
- Diwan Velu Thampi's Revolt (**1808-1809**): after Company's harsh conditions imposed on the state of **Travancore** after subsidiary alliance arrangement.
	- Assisted by Nair Troops. He addressed a gathering at Kundara calling for taking up of arms against British to oust them -> called Kundara proclamation.
	- Maharaja of Travancore had not wholly supported the rebellion and defected to side of EIC.
	- After Velu Thampi died the rebellion fizzled out.

### Civil Rebellion in Awadh (1799) by

- **Wazir Ali Khan** WAK, the fourth Nawab of *Awadh* got *replaced by his uncle*, **Saadat Ali Khan II**.
- Killed a British resident killed two other Europeans aka Massacre of Benares defeated by General **Erskine**.

### Uprisings in Ganjam and Gumsur (1800, 1835-37) :

- **Strikara Bhanj**, a zamindar of Gumsur in Ganjam district, refused to pay revenues in 1797 joined by **Jlani Deo** of Vizianagar.
- Zamindari of Gumsur was forfeited

### Uprisings in Palamau ( 1800-02 )

- against **agrarian landlordism** and feudal system .
- Bhukhan Singh BS, a Chero chief, was the leader.

### Paika Rebellion (1817)

- Orissa Paikas were traditional land-owning milita who were employed by the British.
- were deemed as a threat to the British regime.
- were to be disbanded and their Jagirs were to be confiscated.
- Bakshi Jagabandhu Bidyadhar , Mukunda Deva and Dinabandhu Santra were important leaders.
- Raja of Khurda lost his primacy when the EIC ran over much of Odisha in 1803 leading to the rebellion.
- A commission under Walter Ewer was set up to look into the issue which recommended hereditary rent free lands to be taken away from the Paikas.
- Certain other reasons for discontent was the rise of price of salt, abolition of cowrie currency for payment of taxes, extortionist land revenue policy.
- It ended with the surrender of Bakshi Jagandhu in 1825.

### Kuka Movement (1840-1872) Punjab

- religious movement by **Bhagat Jawahar Mal** transformed into political one.
- Ram Singh, a noted leader was deported to Rangoon.

### Rampa Rebellion 1920s

- It was led by Alluri Sitaraman Raju against the British for the imposition of 1882 Madras Forest Act that restricted the free movt of tribal community in the forest.
- This also affected their traditional podu shifting cultivation system.
- It ended in 1924 when Sitaramn Raju was executed.

## Various other Smaller Uprisings

- Revolt of Dhundia in Bednur (**1799-1800**) by **Dhundia Wagh** local leader in **Mysore** region.
- Parlakimedi Outbreak ( 1813-34) in **Orissa** led by Narayan Deo and Gajapathi Deo.
- Kutch Rebellion (**1819**) in Gujarat led by **Rao Bharamal**
- Rising at Bareilly ( 1816 ) in Uttar Pradesh led by **Mufti Muhammad Aiwaz**, a religious leader against **municipal tax** turned into a religious jehad.
- **Upsurge in Hathras (1817) in Aligarh and Agra in Uttar Pradesh. **Dayaram** and **Bhagwant Singh** were the important insurgents.
- Revolt of Savantavadi (1844-59) **North Konkan Coast**. Phond Savant, Subana Nikam, Daji Lakshman and Har Savant Dingnekar were important insurrectionists.
- Ahom Revolt (1828) Assam led by Gomdhar Konwar and Maharaja Purandhar Singh. Narendra Gadadhar Singh and Kumar Rupchand were other leaders.

## References

[^1]: Sekhar Bandyopadhyay

[^2]: Bipan Chandra

[^3]: Rajiv Ahir

## PYQs

---

**Peasant movements and tribal uprisings in the 18th and 19th centuries**

1. "Tribal revolts were a reaction to an alien, unfeeling administration." Elucidate with reference to the British tribal policy in Eastern India in the nineteenth century. [1982, 60m]
- [Reasons for Tribal revolts :](onenote: [[Peasant]] %20Movements%20and%20Tribal%20Uprisings%20in%20the%2018th%20and%2019th%20Century&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={B8CE06D5-BF12-4DA2-97F1-863C2D9AE7E6}&object-id={E888B025-2E5A-4AF1-B820-E217047B3367}&F&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
- [Pressed by rev farming sys, contractors like Debi Singh or](onenote: [[Rangpur]] %20Dhing%20Rebellion%201783&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={8116C82B-5B4E-4528-8002-9A54685EEF13}&object-id={1C406439-A9EF-42B6-AE34-00FFA7260849}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
- More specific content needed

1. Discuss briefly the tribal revolts in Eastern India from 1817 to 1857. Were they directed against landlordism and colonialism? [1988, 60m]
- [Kol Rebellion 1832](onenote: [[Kol]] %20Rebellion%201832&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={116C0682-FECE-4E35-A879-7A74365867FD}&end&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
- [Santhal Hul Rebellion 1855-1857](onenote: [[Santhal]] %20Hul%20Rebellion%201855-1857&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={1EE46CFF-2A1F-4288-B218-026A56E5EF8D}&end&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
- [Characteristics of these revolts :](onenote: [[Peasant]] %20Movements%20and%20Tribal%20Uprisings%20in%20the%2018th%20and%2019th%20Century&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={B8CE06D5-BF12-4DA2-97F1-863C2D9AE7E6}&object-id={E888B025-2E5A-4AF1-B820-E217047B3367}&28&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )

1. Discuss the origins and character of major peasant and tribal uprisings in the late 18th and 19th centuries were these protest movements backwards-looking? [1992, 60m]
- Tribal Revolts : [Reasons for Tribal revolts :](onenote: [[Peasant]] %20Movements%20and%20Tribal%20Uprisings%20in%20the%2018th%20and%2019th%20Century&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={B8CE06D5-BF12-4DA2-97F1-863C2D9AE7E6}&object-id={E888B025-2E5A-4AF1-B820-E217047B3367}&F&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> ) onwards
- Peasant Revolt : [Civil Rebellion :](onenote: [[Peasant]] %20Movements%20and%20Tribal%20Uprisings%20in%20the%2018th%20and%2019th%20Century&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={B8CE06D5-BF12-4DA2-97F1-863C2D9AE7E6}&object-id={5492818D-F02A-4503-B9E0-0604FDFFF226}&38&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> ) onwards

1. Tribal movements should be viewed as‚ 'History from below‛. Discuss the objects and nature of the movements in 19th century India. [1997, 60m]
- [Tribal Revolts : Reasons for Tribal revolts : onwards](onenote: [[07 GS-4/1. Human-Values/PYQ]] &section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={91B7E7A7-0EDB-4FA0-9D86-857AF2691A9E}&object-id={D0E2418E-8317-4704-B4A0-D4E94DD627E4}&16&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )

1. "The tribal and peasant rebellion laid the foundation of the revolt of 1857." Comment. [2001, 20m]
- [Sepoy was actually a peasant in uniform, if their or](onenote: [[The]] %20Great%20Revolt%20of%201857%20-%20its%20Origin,%20character,%20causes%20and%20failure%20and%20its%20consequences.&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={1B5E51BA-DD4E-43D7-9024-76A97139073D}&object-id={88ADB685-17B8-47AA-8747-89CC5BF66580}&61&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
- Santhal Hul - [expansion of agricultural settlement to the tribal areas of Rajamahal](onenote: [[Santhal]] %20Hul%20Rebellion%201855-1857&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={1EE46CFF-2A1F-4288-B218-026A56E5EF8D}&object-id={B28EEB4D-1299-47DC-8A56-1ECEA1EEF67E}&11&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )

1. "Tribals revolted more often and far more violently than any other community including peasants in India." Elaborate [2011, 30m]
- [Reasons for Tribal revolts :](onenote: [[Peasant]] %20Movements%20and%20Tribal%20Uprisings%20in%20the%2018th%20and%2019th%20Century&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={B8CE06D5-BF12-4DA2-97F1-863C2D9AE7E6}&object-id={E888B025-2E5A-4AF1-B820-E217047B3367}&F&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
- [advocated the killing of Thikadars, Jagirdars, Rajas, Hakims and Christians](onenote: [[Munda]] %20Ulgulan%201899-1900&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={992ECEAB-F40A-4AD0-9A00-34B33D034942}&object-id={E1084BE3-070F-485D-811A-A156A80EF793}&47&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )

1. How far is it correct to say that the 19th century tribal uprisings are a part of subaltern nationalism? [2016, 20m]
- [Tribals were the Majhis and Parganites they wanted to usher](onenote: [[Santhal]] %20Hul%20Rebellion%201855-1857&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={1EE46CFF-2A1F-4288-B218-026A56E5EF8D}&object-id={BABA4F22-657D-4FE3-8982-2757AF0F23A7}&16&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
- [active participation from women and lacked animosity against economically subordinate](onenote: [[Munda]] %20Ulgulan%201899-1900&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={992ECEAB-F40A-4AD0-9A00-34B33D034942}&object-id={8C6251D3-781D-4A07-BD7D-F433DB1DC6E1}&28&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
