# Moplah Rebellion 1841-1920

2020-04-27 15:10:52

---

**1840s - 1850s**

- Mopilah descendents of Arab traders, converted lower caste Hindus, slave case.
- **Jenmi** recognised as absolute owners of land, right to evict tenants.
- Reduced **Kanamdar** (tenure holders) and cultivators to tenants and leaseholders.
- Imar Qazi, Sayyid Alavi Tangal, Sayyid Fazal Pookkoya etc led.
- Mosques became centres of mobilisation.
- Centres were Manjeri, Kulathur, South malabar and Mattannur.

**Moplah Rebellion (1921)**

- tenants rebelled against majority Hindu landlords against lack of security of tenure, renewal fees, high rents, oppressive extractions of landlords.
- Manjheri association of the Congress supported the tenants stirred by Khilafat struggles.
- arrest of local priest from a mosque provided the spark that was needed.
- Hindu landlords, govt courts, police stations, treasuries etc were looted/attacked burning records.
- Martial law was declared and Hindu landlords were pressurised to give away names of rebels.
- The movt soon took communal overtones.
- Jenmi landlords backed by police, law courts and revenue officials tightened their grip over Moplah peasants.
- DN Dhanagare argues that burning the bodies of the peasant to demoralise them incited the peasants to retaliate.
- Defiling of temples by peasants gave it an anti-Hindu turn and after 1896 it took communal orientation to what was a class struggle.

## PYQs

---

**Mopla Rebellion in Malabar (1841-1920)**

1. "The roots of Moplah discontent were clearly agrarian…." Comment. [1986, 20m]
- [tenants rebelled against majority Hindu landlords against lack of security](onenote: [[Moplah]] %20Rebellion%201841-1920&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={3E237CB2-4C82-4FEB-B836-41E181581B2B}&object-id={C69DCFF9-E58E-4C2C-AEDC-9CF6231F7212}&F&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )

1. The roots of the Moplah uprising (1921) were clearly agrarian. Do you agree? [1990, 60m]
- [tenants rebelled against majority Hindu landlords against lack of security](onenote: [[Moplah]] %20Rebellion%201841-1920&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={3E237CB2-4C82-4FEB-B836-41E181581B2B}&object-id={C69DCFF9-E58E-4C2C-AEDC-9CF6231F7212}&F&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )

1. The 1921 Moplah rebellion was "in essence an expression of long-standing agrarian discontent which was intensified by the religious and ethnic identity." Comment. [2000,
20m]
- [tenants rebelled against majority Hindu landlords against lack of security](onenote: [[Moplah]] %20Rebellion%201841-1920&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={3E237CB2-4C82-4FEB-B836-41E181581B2B}&object-id={C69DCFF9-E58E-4C2C-AEDC-9CF6231F7212}&F&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )

1. Was the Moplah Rebellion in Malabar an expression of anti-landlord and anti-foreign discontent? Discuss. [2018, 20 Marks]
- [tenants rebelled against majority Hindu landlords against lack of security](onenote: [[Moplah]] %20Rebellion%201841-1920&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={3E237CB2-4C82-4FEB-B836-41E181581B2B}&object-id={C69DCFF9-E58E-4C2C-AEDC-9CF6231F7212}&F&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
