# Santhal Hul Rebellion 1855-1857

2020-04-27 15:11:00


---

- ==Most massive of all Tribal revolts==.
- Area affected was b/w Bhagalpur and Rajmahal known as Daman-i-Koh.
- Revolted to expel the outsiders called the Dikus and to annihilate alien regime.
- Tribals were the Majhis and Parganites they wanted to usher a 'Satyug'.
- Sidho and Kanho were the leaders who claimed that the Thakur or god had blessed and told them to fight.
- Procession were carried out, participated by men and women alike. They formed bands of 1500-2000 soldiers.
- attacked Mahajans and Zamindars, police stations, railway construction sites.
- were helped by non-tribal people like lohars, Gwalas, etc.
- Martial law was declared, suppression was ruthless.
- Sidho was killed in 1855 and Kanho was captured in 1866.
- Birbhum, Bankura, Singhbhum, Hazaribagh, Bhagalpur and Monghyr were affected areas.
---
- Moneylenders used to take interest rates ranging from 50-500%, they took lands of the Santhal, forced labour and sexual exploitation of women were done.
- Initially the movement was against mahajans and traders.
- expansion of agricultural settlement to the tribal areas of Rajamahal hills caused conflict with the Paharia tribes.
- were given an annual allowance and made responsible for proper conduct of their men.
- lower hills were occupied by the Santhal settlers, Paharias receded deeper in Rajamahal hills.
- Damin i Koh was declared as the land of the Santhal demarcated from the land of the plains people and the Paharia tribes.
---
- State levying heavy taxes.
- moneylender of Dikus charging high rates of interest.
- zamindars opression.
- Cuttack, Dhabhum, Manbhumm, Barabhum etc.
- Area around Rajmahal hills called Damin I koh.
- Tribal lands leased to outsiders, Dikkus.
- Gave ample warning in advance.
- Charactersied rebel actions as traditional hunting activity.

## PYQs

**Santal Hul (1855)**

1."The Santhal hool began in July 1855. The core of the movement was economic, the basic cause of the uprising was agrarian discontent." -- Elucidate [2012, 10m]

- [Santhal Hul Rebellion 1855-1857](onenote: [[Santhal]] %20Hul%20Rebellion%201855-1857&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={1EE46CFF-2A1F-4288-B218-026A56E5EF8D}&end&base-path= <https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one> )
