# Indigo Rebellion 1859-1860
2020-04-27 15:11:12

---

The Indigo revolt took place from 1859-60
-   led by Digambar Biswas and Bishnu Biswas against forcing the peasant to grown Indigo corps.
-   peasants learnt to use the  **legal machinery** and **Bengali intelligentsia** played imp role in it propagation.
-   Indigo commission issued a notificaiton in Nov 1860.
-   Planters forced meagre amounts as advance and enter into fraudulent contracts. Price paid for the plant was less than the market price
-   It was done on the best land of the raiyats.
-   Planters with the help of his lathiyals attacked peasants, flogged them, kidnapped women and children to force them to cultivate indigo.
-   The immediate cause was the misreading of the government order and allowing them to retain possession of their land and sow whatever they wished in them.
-   They did not wanted to grow indigo under duress from the Planters.
-   Govindpur in Nadia district of Bengal was the 1st to rise. They formed a counter band under Bishnu and Digambar Biswas against the Lathiyals.
-   It soon spread to other parts, peasants stopped taking advances
-   Planters and Zamindars threatened with eviction from their lands and increased rents. The Ryots went on a rent strike against this.
-   Later they learnt how to use legal machinery and social boycotts against oppression.
-   Indigo plantation was virtually wiped by the end of 1860 from Bengal.

**Reasons for Success **
-   Hindu Muslim unity
-   Cooperation, organisation and discipline of the ryots.
-   Intelligentsia helped the ryots in their cause. Harish Chandra Mukherjee published regular reports in Hindo Patriot (started by Madhusudan Ray).
-   Newspapers like The Bengalee gave it wide coverage
-   Din Bandhu Mitras play Neel Darpan was based on this.
-   Missionaries also supported the cause of the ryots.
-   Indigo Commission was established in 1860 and the gov in Nov that year said that the planters would no longer be coerced to plant indigo.


![Areas of Indigo Revolt MAL DA RAJ SHAH' / MURS IDABA7' KARIMBUR B (R BHUM MEHERPUR MUCHADA NADIA B U RD WAN KRISHNAGAR BURDWAN BANGAON SARA SAT 'SIRAJGANJ • p A BNA e PABNA MAGURA JESSORE DACCA DACCA NARAIL u, h JESSORE % l, (BAKARGANJ BAKARGANJ 24 PARGANAS 3 Districts Effected by Indigo Revolt in Bengal ](Indigo-Rebellion-1859-1860-image1-23585325.png)




**Indigo Rebellion (1859-60)**


1. "The Indigo Revolt of 1859-60 holds a very significant place in our history of national
liberation movement. For the first time in the history of our anti-colonial struggle, its two
independent currents-- spontaneous peasant resistance and constitutional agitation in
defence of peasantry -- came into mutual contact." Critically examine. [2015, 10m]
-   [Indigo Rebellion 1859-1860](onenote: [[Indigo]] %20Rebellion%201859-1860&section-id={246B5FB2-E863-4692-8081-C7DFE8A0C6E5}&page-id={27A1DA12-F521-4471-928B-EC9B2FF68BB4}&end&base-path= https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Indian%20Response.one )




