# Munda Ulgulan 1899-1900
2020-04-27 15:11:31

---

-   Birsa Munda led the rebellion/Ulgulan
- @  against the destruction of their traditional system of life and intrusion of Jagirdar, Thikadar and merchant moneylenders.
-   declared himself to be a messenger of god and of possessing magical powers.
-   later acquired agrarian and political basis.
- &  advocated the killing of Thikadars, Jagirdars, Rajas, Hakims and Christians for the establishment of Satyug.
-   captured in Feb 1900 and died in Jail
---
-   Affected the region of Chottanagpur
- $  Reasons were the erosion of customary rights, forced labour

>   **KS Singh** has shown that the movt was related to Christianity. Mundas had accepted Christianity because they sympathised with them against the Zamindars. Zamindars attacked the German mission in Ranchi against this.
-   But the Mundas soon turned against the missionaries after a new kingdom under John the Baptist was set up at Doesa.
-   Birsa claimed medicinal and healing powers.
-   followers wanted to establish a just order free from exploiters.
-   active participation from women and lacked animosity against economically subordinate non-tribal people.
---
-   Bullet to water, took to pilgrimage Munda holy places
- &  Disum - Munda land
-   Aim - destroy enemies, end B rule
-   Greater awareness of wider political realities
- @ British rule replaced the Khuntkatti agrarian system, missionary activities insulted religiou and cultural ethos of Adivasis
-   Birsa was inspired by the Sardari Larai Movt that demanded restoration of tribal rights and relied on non violent means of sending prayers and petitions. Movt failed and Birsa realised it was futile sending petitions.
- &  Veth Begari or feudal labour was also abused by the Britishers and the Dikus.




