# Nehru's Foreign Policy

2020-04-26 19:47:25

```toc
```

---

- Marked by consistency, continuity.
- Not fall into joining military blocs -> end up becoming pawns ie Non Alignment/ NAM
- Wanted to weight what is wrong and right and then take decision
- His FP he wanted to extend support to colonial and ex colonial countries against colonialism
- NAM helped democratisation of international relations esp in the UN w/ the one nation and one vote system checking the dominance of western bloc.
- NAM Facilitated world peace. Nehru opposed war, wanted nuclear and general disarmament. It was guided by Gandhi ji's ideas.
- Emphasised peaceful co-existence of countries of different ideologies and system this led to **Panchsheel** ie respect territorial integrity, non aggression, non interference, equality and mutual benefit and peaceful co-existence.
- Even before independence in March 1947 he called for an Asian Relations Conference at Delhi for asian independence and their assertion at world stage.
- Next conference in December 1947 to prevent re-colonisation of Indonesia by Dutch.
- Followed by Asian Leaders confernce in 1954, Afro Asia conference in Bandung 1955 which was precursor to NAM Belgrade conf.
- Pinnacle was 1961 where he supported Nasser of Egypt and Tito of Yugoslavia to call for Nuclear Disarmament in Belgrade.
- IFP aimed to Protect, promote IN economic interest.
- Helped it get military equipments from many different countries including USSR and USA.
- Major arms deals with USSR, Green revolution was supported by USA.
- Maintained active profile in multilateral bodies ex Commonwealth

## International Role of India

### Korean War

- Korean war 1950 IN supported US in UNSC, condemned NK as aggressor.
- US crossed the 38th paralled till Yalu river which formed boundary of Korea and CN. CN then sent armed volunteers to push US south of 38th parallel.
- IN sent **60 Para Field Ambulance** which was largest medical force in Korean war
- Tested IN faith in NAM

### Indo-China

- US poured aid to French colonial power againt Viet Minh. Nehru wanted ceasefire.
- Asian leaders conference at Colombo called in 1954. VK Krishna Menon sent to Geneva conference to explain Asian position to US.
- Helped prevent further internationalisation of Indo China conflict.

### Suez Canal

- US UK withdrew fin aid to build Aswan Dam -> Nasser nationalising foreign banks.
- Britain France wanted international control over it.
- IN recognised it as integral part of Egypt. Wanted BR and FR to observe restraint.
- ISR attack on Suez was condemned as called naked aggression.
- IN troops participated in withdrawal as peace keepers.

### Hungary

- USSR aggression to crush anti soviet rebellion in 1956. IN abstained from condemning it that was formally condemned by the West.
- IN position was that situation was more complex than it seemed with formation of 2 influence zones ie West and East.
- Nehru criticised Soviet action and did not send an ambassador to Budapest for 2 years.

### Congo

- Belgium supported new province of Katanga. Lumumba the PM of Congo called for UN US and USSR for help.
- US supported President Kasavubu, USSR backed Patrice Lumumba and Belgians the arm leader Mobutu.
- Lumumba was murdered. IN asked UN for help and sent IN peace keepers which brought civil war to end.

## Relations w/ Superpowers

### USA

- US stand on Kashmir inhibited friendship. UN commission reports of Pakistan being as aggressors were ignored. Food aids were kept hanging.
- US did not appreciated recognition of Communist CN and gave Pak mil aid in 1952, they were included in CENTO, SEATO.
- US supported Portugal in Goa.
- Was due to US obsession w/ Communism. They could not fathom that other countries could have different set of priorities.
- US thought that IN diversity would lead to disintegration of IN so it could not be counted as a Bulwark against Communism.
- Strong pro colonial establishment was present in US.
- Certain informed and liberal sections of US were pro-India.

### USSR

- Soveits were ambivalent saw IN as still being under imperialist influence.
- Further CPI insurgency in Telangana and IN decision to stay w/ commonwealth was seen as surrendering to imperialism.
- 1951-52 it sent food shipments along w/ China. Stalin offered a treaty of friendship.
- 1955 Nehru visited USSR, Krushchev reciprocated.
- 1956 Comintern pacified Cold war stance by taking cognisance peaceful coexistence b/w countries belonging to diff social systems.
- helped build Bhilai, Bokaro stell plants. Helped oil exploration.
- When Dalai Lama seeked refuge in 1959. USSR did not side w/ CN but took a neutral stance.
- 1962 Mig 21 mfg deal was 1st time a non-communist country given permit to mfg sophisticated mil equipment.
- Dec 1962 decl CN as responsible for war.
- Did not station personnel to supervise use of equipment nor laid down conditions for deployment of equipment.
- IN USSR friendship checked border disputes w/ Soviets and CN.
- Was most critical element of Indian Foreign Policy.

## PYQs

---

Nehru's Foreign Policy; India and her neighbours (1947-1964)

1. Jawaharlal Nehru was the architect of India's policy of non-alignment. In the light of this
statement discuss India's relations with the two 'Power Blocks' between 1947-1964. [2001,
60m]

```ad-Answer


```

1. Analyse Indian foreign policy of Non-alignment between 1947 and 1964. [2004, 60m]

```ad-Answer


```

1. Would you agree that India's effort to pursue an independent foreign policy was a
highlight of post-1947 politics? [2011, 30m]

```ad-Answer


```

1. "Nehru's policy of Non-Alignment came to symbolised the struggle of India and other
newly independent nations to retain and strengthen their independence from colonialism." Critically evaluate. [2012, 10m]

```ad-Answer


```
