# Trade Revolution

2020-04-27 12:35:

```toc
```

---

## Trade

- volume of production was higher than the local consumption. Large amounts of this surplus production were used for trading purpose
- another significant feature was the entry of few prominent European countries in the trading arena
- **Local and Regional Trade** : land revenue was realized in cash. surplus was sold in the village itself. Most of the purchase was made by Banjaras. Tavernier mentions rice, flour, butter, milk, sugar etc.
	- There were sarrafs or money changers in big villages. Hat and Penth were markets where people could exchange or buy things.
	- These local trading centres were linked to bigger commercial centres in a region.
- $ J. Linschoten mentions about Goa streets full of shops selling all kinds of silks, velvet, satin etc. They had large no of sarais.
- **Inter-Regional Trade** : largescale inter-regional trade was phenomenally high in volume, main commodities of largescale inter-regional trade were foodgrains and various sorts of textiles.
	- important trading centres of Bengal were Hugli, Dacca, Murshidabad, Malda, Satgaon, Tanda, Hijili, Sripur, and Sonargaon. Here textiles from Bihar, Silk from Gujarat, Saffron from Kashmir was sold and traded.
	- In the west, Ahmedabad and Surat, the biggest commercial centres . Pepper and Spices from Malabar coast and Indigo from Gujarat were special objects sold.
	- In Agra Paper from Shazadpur, Saffron, wood, woolen cloth from Kashmir, Indigo from bayana and marble from Rajasthan were sold.
- **Coastal Trade** : Piracy on the western coast was rampant thus convoys were used to protect trade. Goa and Cochin were imp centres
	- Boats ladden with copper, zinc, tin, tobacco, spices and chintz came from Coromandal coast to the coastal towns of Benga. Sind-Cambay; Gujarat-Malabar; Bengal-Coromandal; and Malabar-Coromanda were other routes.

### Changes in the Means of Production :

 - [ ] #todo

### Critical Study of Dev of Medieval Indian Towns :

 - [ ] #todo

### Were They an Extension of Villages

 - [ ] #todo

### Karkhana/ How Was Production Organised in Them

- [ ] #todo
