# Human Geography

2020-01-28 22:54:19

---

- **Cereals** occupy 54% of cropped area in India and the 3rd largest producer after China and USA -- further classified into coarse grain eg jowar, barjra, maize, ragi and fine grain eg rice and wheat.
- **Rice** : there are 3000 varieties of it, grown 0 to 2000mt altitude. In WB 3 crops are grown are know as ==aus, aman and boro==. Grown in all 3 seasons in WB and southern states and only in Kharif in ==northern areas==. it was introduced in 1970s in Punjab and Har. The yield is low in raifed areas of MP, Chhatt and Odisha.
- Wheat : 2nd most imp cereal crop, primarly sown in temperate zones. In produces 11.7% of total worlds rice North IN has more than 85% of total ar in Gangetic plain, Malwa plateau and Himalayas, gorwin up to 2700m altitude. Yield high in 4000kg/ha in Pun and Har
- **Jowar** : Occupies 16.5% of total cropped area in country, ==Maha== produces the most, Sown in both Kharif and rabi seasons as rainfed in southern states but is a Kharif crop in North India.
- **Bajra** : sown in hot and dry climatic conditions, occupies 5.2% total cropping area major producers are MAH, Guj, UP, Raj. Rainfed crop, yield has increased recently due to resistant varieties.
- **Maize** : is a food as well as fodder corp, gown in semi arid climates and inferior soils occupies 3.6% of total cropped area sown all over except Punjab and Eastern and North Eastern regions.
- **Pulses** : are legume crops that inc fertility of soils, IN is leading producer of pulses. concentrated in drylands of Deccan and Central Plateau and nothewestern parts. 11% of total cropped area. Rainfed crop - yield fluctuates , Gram and Tur are main examples.
	- **Gram** : cultivated in subtropical areas, mostly rainfed cultivated during rabi season in central, western and non western parts. was displaecd by Wheat after green rev in Pun and Har. MP, UP and Mah are leading producer. covers 2.8% of total cropped ar.
	- Tur/ Arhar : 2nd most imp pulse crop aka red gram/ pigeon pea, rainfed in souther and central regions, 2% of TCA Mah is largest producer.
- **Oilseeds** : produced for extracting edible oils, Malwa, Marathawad, Guj, Raj are major producing area occupies 14% of TCA, Groundnut, rapeseed and mustard, soyabean etc are grown.
	- **Groundnut** : produces about 15% of total in world, largely a rainfed Kharif crop of drylands, 3.6% of TCA Guj, Raj, TN. Tel are leading producer. yield is high only in TN due to it being irrigated elsewhere it is low.
	- **Rapeseed and Mustard** : ex rai, sarson, toria and taramira are sub tropical crops cultivated during rabi season are frost sensitive occupy 2.5% of TCA yields are high in Har and Raj.
	- **Other Oilseeds** : that are grown are soyabean and sunflower. soyabean is mostly grown in MP and Maha 90%, Sunflower is grown in Ktaka, AP, Tel is a minor crop in north but its yield is high.
- **Fibre Crops** : Cotton and jute are 2 main fibre in IN.
Cotton : Accreage has considerably increased in last 50yrs. In grows boht short staple and long staple called 'narma'. It requred clear sky during flowering stage. Occupies 4.7% of TCA and IN is 2nd largest producer. 3 main areas are Pun, Har and north Raj in NW and Ktaka and TN in south. The yield is high in areas of Guj Mah and Tel in where it is under irrigation.
- **Jute** : Cash crop in WB and adjoining easter parts of country . IN produces 60% of total world production. Bihar and Assam are other areas to produce covers 0.5% of TCA.
- **Sugarcane** : It is a tropical crop under rainfed conditions in sub humid and humid conditions largely an irrigated crop.
