# Introduction of Western Education in India

2020-04-27 15:06:50

```toc
```

---

## Steps Taken

- Charity run schools C, M, Bom to Display of superior moral and ethical values
- Danish settlements used to spread western ed.
- 1813 act 100, 000 rupees for encouragement learned natives, revival of lit, promote knowledge of sciences.
- Orientalist philosophy -> Sanskrit college, 2 oriental coll Agra+ Delhi and tols and madrassas.
- David Hare estd school in C, C school Society, C Book Society.
- RR Roy wanted Eng ed, Bentick appt Macaulay commission -> Macaulay minute become basis of Eng edu.
- 1825 society for translating EU sciences, society for acquisition of GK 1838, IN asso for cultivation of science 1876, Banaras debating club 1861, Aligarh Scientific society 1861, Bihar Scientific society 1868.

```ad-Views

-   **Sabyasachi Bhattacharya** : producing knowledge assigned to metropolitan country, its reproduction, replication and dissemination for colonised people

-   **Gauri Viswanathan** : prev Eng studied as literature now as medium of modern knowledge

```

## Analysis of Their Measures

- [[5.2 Orientalist Anglicist Controversy#^92f742 |Downward Filteration Theory]]
- Dalits/untouchables were deliberately excluded
- Use for proselytization to inculcate loyalty this Did not function due to less material reward
- Educated IN were selectively used to understand colonialism

```ad-Views

 **BT McCully** : Eng ed brought native youth w/ body of thought  (post enlightenment rationalism) that openly questioned fundamental assumptions

```

- Enlightenment showm as panacea for all evils and backwardness
- Derozians : free thinking, Young Bengal movt ^63368f
    - $ Sumit Sarkar : they left little distinctive permanent impression
- Indians took it as a Challenge to rediscover reason, science in their own civ

## Gopal Ganesh Agarkar

- was an educationist and social reformer
- co-founder of New English School, Deccan Education Society and Ferguson college.
- First editor of Kesari and started the periodical Sudharak.

## PYQs

1. Write a critical note on: "Impact of western contact on social changes in the first half of 19th century." [1981, 20m]
-   Impacts of
    -   Orientalism - [Orientalist Anglicist Controversy](onenote:[[Orientalist]]%20Anglicist%20Controversy&section-id={B79FD829-FA0F-426F-B425-A852F19A4727}&page-id={3CCDEF23-4F1B-474E-B656-7FA1CD662E8B}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Social%5eJ%20Cultural%20Dev.one)
    -   Anglicism - [Orientalist Anglicist Controversy](onenote:[[Orientalist]]%20Anglicist%20Controversy&section-id={B79FD829-FA0F-426F-B425-A852F19A4727}&page-id={3CCDEF23-4F1B-474E-B656-7FA1CD662E8B}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Social%5eJ%20Cultural%20Dev.one)
    -   Evangelicalism - [Christian Missionary Activities in India](onenote:[[Christian]]%20Missionary%20Activities%20in%20India&section-id={B79FD829-FA0F-426F-B425-A852F19A4727}&page-id={B0E7347F-0F82-4DEA-AD97-FB54B3918FFC}&end&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I/Social%5eJ%20Cultural%20Dev.one)
    -   [Ideas of Reform](onenote:Social%5eJ%20Religious%20Reform%20in%20Bengal.one#Social%20Reform%20movements%20viz%20Sati,%20Widow%20Remarriage,%20Child%20Marriage%20etc.&section-id={A977D883-2588-4815-BADC-1D76D59D42AD}&page-id={7154C4E6-5250-47C2-8060-18FE30AAD146}&object-id={98B350A5-B37D-4D77-8A4D-0ABA39183191}&16&base-path=https://d.docs.live.net/bbc8be5bd337910c/Documents/History%20Optional/Modern%20History/Part%20I)

3. "India broke her British fetters with western hammers." Comment. [1997, 20m]
-   





4. "India broke her British fetters with Western hammers." Comment. [2002, 20m]
-

6."The current practice of categorization of 'Early Modern India' is based on a shift from the old imperialist periodization of 'Muslim India' -- 'British India' to the more secularist one of 'Medieval India' -- 'Modern India', which puts Indian history in a universalist chronological Structure." Critically evaluate. [2012, 10m]
-   







7. "An ideology of paternalistic benevolence, occasionally combined with talk of trusteeship and training towards self-government, thinly veiled the realities of a Raj uncompromisingly white and despotic." [2018, 10m]
-   







8. "Faced with the challenge of the intrusion of colonial culture and ideology an attempt to
reinvigorate traditional institutions and to realize the potential of traditional culture
developed during the nineteenth century." [2018, 10m]
-